ed, and thus in haste to th'Angel cried.



O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed;
Is Piety thus and pure Devotion paid?



They whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied.

 These two are Brethren, Adam,
and to come
Out of thy loins; th'unjust the just hath slain,
For envy that his Brothers Offering found
From Heaven acceptance; but the bloody Fact
Will be avenged, and th'others Faith approved
Loose no reward, though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore.  To which
our Sire.



Alas, both for the deed and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death? Is this the way
I must return to native dust? O sight
Of terror, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!



To whom thus Michael.

 Death thou has seen
In his first shape on man; but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim Cave, all dismal; yet to sense
More terrible at th'entrance then within.
Some, as thou saw, by violent stroke shall die,
By Fire, Flood, Famine, by Intemperance more
In Meats and Drinks which on the Earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear; that thou may know
What misery th'inabstinence of Eve

Shall bring on men.   Immediately a
place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark,
A Laser-house it seemed, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased, all maladies
Of ghastly Spasm, or racking torture, qualms

Of heart-sick Agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs,
Intestine Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs,
Daelig;monies Frenzy, moaping Melancholy
And Moon-struck madness, pining Atrophy,
Marasmus, and wide-wasting Pestilence,
Dropsies, and Asthma's, and Joint-racking Rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair
Tended the sick busiest from Couch to Couch;
And over them triumphant Death his Dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of Rock could long
Drie-ey'd behold? Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of Woman born; compassion quelled
His best of Man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess,
And scarce recovering words his plaint renewed.



O miserable Mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
Better end hear unborn.  Why is life given
To be thus wrested from us? rather why
Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew
What we receive, would either not accept
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down,
Glad to be so dismissed in peace.  Can thus
Th'Image of God in man created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debas't
Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man,
Retaining still Divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And for his Makers Image sake exempt?




Their Makers Image,  answered
Michael,  then
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified
To serve ungoverned appetite, and took
His Image whom they served, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but their own,
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsome sickness, worthily, since they
Gods Image did not reverence in themselves.



I yield it just,  said Adam,
 and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To Death, and mix with our connatural dust;





There is,  said Michael,
 if thou well observe
The rule of not too much, by temperance taught
In what thou eats and drinks, seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So may thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop
Into thy Mothers lap, or be with ease
Gathered, not harshly plucked, for death mature:
This is old age; but then thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
To withered weak and gray; thy Senses then
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forgo,
To what thou has, and for the Air of youth
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy Spirits down, and last consume
The Balm of Life.  To whom our
Ancestor.



Henceforth I fly not Death, nor would prolong
Life much, bent rather how I may be quit

Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge,
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendering up, and patiently attend
My dissolution. 
Michael replied.




 Nor love thy Life, nor hate;
but what thou  lives
Live well, how long or short permit to Heaven:
And now prepare thee for another sight.



He looked and saw a spacious Plain, whereon
Were Tents of various hue; by some were herds
Of Cattle grazing: others, whence the sound
Of Instruments that made melodious chime
Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moved
Their stops and chords was seen: his volant touch
Instinct through all proportions low and high
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who at the Forge
Labouring, two massy clods of Iron and Brass     
Had melted (whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on Mountain or in Vale,
Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot
To some Caves mouth, or whether washed by stream
From underground) the liquid Ore he dreind
Into fit moulds prepared; from which he formed
First his own Tools; then, what might else be wrought
Fusil or graven in mettle.  After these,
But on the hither side a different sort
From the high neighbouring Hills, which was their Seat,
Down to the Plain descended: by their guise
Just men they seemed, and all their study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid, nor those things last which might preserve
Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain
Long had not walked, when from the Tents behold
A Heavy of fair Women, richly gay

In Gems and wanton dress; to the Harp they sung
Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on:
The Men though grave, eyed them, and let their eyes
Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net
Fast caught, they liked, and each his liking chose;
And now of love they treat till th'Eevning Star
Loves Harbinger appeared; then all in heat
They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke

Hymen, then first to marriage Rites invoked;
With Feast and Music all the Tents resound.
Such happy interview and fair event
Of love and youth not lost, Songs, Garlands, Flours,
And charming Symphonies attached the heart
Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight,
The bent of Nature; which he thus expressed.



True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blessed,
Much better seems this Vision, and more hope
Of peaceful days portends, then those two past;
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse,
Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends.



To whom thus Michael.
Judge not what is best
By pleasure, though to Nature seeming meet,
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holy and pure, conformity divine.
Those Tents thou saw so pleasant, were the Tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his Race
Who slew his Brother; studious they appear
Of Arts that polish Life, Inventors rare,
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledged none.
Yet they a beauteous offspring shall beget;
For that fair female Troop thou saw, that seemed
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists

Women's domestic honour and chief praise;
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troule the Tongue, and roll the Eye.
To these that sober Race of Men, whose lives
Religious titl'd them the Sons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
Of these fair Atheists, and now swim in joy,
(Erelong to swim at large) and laugh; for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weep.



To whom thus Adam of short joy bereft.

 O pity and shame, that they who to
live well
Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenor of Mans woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.



 From Mans effeminate
slackness it begins,

 Said th'Angel,
 who should better hold  his place
By wisdom, and superior gifts received.
But now prepare thee for another Scene.



He looked and saw wide Territory spread
Before him, Towns, and rural works between,
Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towers,
Concourse in Arms, fierce Faces threatening War,
Giants of mighty Bone, and bold empress;
Part wield their Arms, part courb the foaming Steed,
Single or in Array of Battle ranged
Both Horse and Foot, nor idly mustering stood;
One way a Band select from forage drives
A herd of Beeves, fair Oxen and fair Kine
From a fat Meadow ground; or fleecy Flock,
Ewes and their bleating Lambs over the Plain,
Their Booty; scarce with Life the Shepherds fly,


But colin aide, which makes a bloody Fray;
With cruel Tournament the Squadrons join;
Where Cattle pastured late, now scattered lies
With Carcasses and Arms th'ensanguind Field
Deserted: Others to a City strong
Lay Siege, encamped; by Battery, Scale, and Mine,
Assaulting; others from the wall defend
With Dart and Jav'lin, Stones and sulphurous Fire;
On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds.
In other part the sceptred Heralds call
To Council in the City Gates: anon
Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriors mixed,
Assemble, and Harangues are heard, but soon
In factious opposition, till at last
Of middle Age one rising, eminent
In wise deport, spake much of Right and Wrong,
Of Justice, of Religion, Truth and Peace,
And Judgment from above: him old and young
Exploded and had seized with violent hands,
Had not a Cloud descending snatched him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and Oppression, and Sword-Law
Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found.

Adam was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turned full