ferings.  This must be our task
In Heaven this our delight; how wearisome
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate.  Let us not then pursue
By force impossible, by leave obtained
Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state
Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek
Our own good from our selves, and from our own
Live to our selves, though in this vast recess,
Free, and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easy yoke
Of servile Pomp.  Our greatness will appear
Then most conspicuous, when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse
We can create, and in what place so ever
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labour and endurance.  This deep world
Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst
Thick clouds and dark doth Heavens all-ruling Sire
Choose to reside, his Glory unobscured,
And with the Majesty of darkness round
Covers his Throne;  from whence deep thunders roar
Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell?
As he our darkness, cannot we his Light
Imitate when we please? This Desert soil 

Wants not her hidden lustre, Gems and Gold;
Nor want we skill or Artsome copies have  art,
from whence to raise
Magnificence; and what can Heaven show more?
Our torments also may in length of time
Become our Elements, these piercing Fires
As soft as now severe, our temper changed
Into their temper; which must needs remove
The sensible of pain.  All things invite
To peaceful Counsels, and the settled State
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and were, dismissing quite
All thoughts of war: ye have what I advise.



He scarce had finished, when such murmur filled
The Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain
The sound of blustering winds, which all night long
Had roused the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Sea-faring men overwatched, whose Bark by chance
Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay
After the Tempest:  Such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his Sentence pleased,
Advising peace: for such another Field
They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear
Of Thunder and the Sword of Michael

Wrought still within them; and no less desire
To found this nether Empire, which might rise
By policy, and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heaven.
Which when Beelzebub perceived, then whom,

Satan except, none higher sat, with grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seemed
A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven
Deliberation sat and public care;
And Princely counsel in his face yet shone, 


Majestic though in ruin: sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders fit to bear
The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention still as Night
Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he spake.



Thrones and Imperial Powers, off-spring of  heaven
Ethereal Virtues; or these Titles now
Must we renounce, and changing stile be called
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclines, here to continue, and build up here
A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heaven hath doomed
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt
From Heavens high jurisdiction, in new League
Banded against his Throne, but to remain
In strictest bondage, though thus far removed,
Under the inevitable curb, reserved
His captive multitude: For he, be sure
In height or depth, still first and last will Reign
Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His Empire, and with Iron Sceptre rule
Us here, as with his Golden those in Heaven.
What sit we then projecting peace and War?
War hath determined us, and foiled with loss
Irreparable; terms of peace yet none
Vouchsafed or sought; for what peace will be given
To us enslaved, but custody severe,
And stripes, and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But to our power hostility and hate,
Untamed reluctance, and revenge though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least 

May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heaven, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege,
Or ambush from the Deep.  What if we find
Some easier enterprise? There is a place
(if ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven
Err not) another World, the happy seat
Of some new Race called Man, about this time
To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favoured more
Of him who rules above; so was his will
Pronounced among the Gods, and by an Oath,
That shook Heavens whole circumference, confirmed.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould,
Or substance, how endued, and what their Power,
And where their weakness, how attempted best,
By force or subtlety: Though Heaven be shut,
And Heavens high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lye exposed
The utmost border of his Kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here perhaps
Some advantageous act may be achieved
By sudden onset, either with Hell fire
To waste his whole Creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive as we were driven,
The puny habitants, or if not drive,
Seduce them to our Party, that their God
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works.  This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our Confusion, and our joy upraise 


In his disturbance; when his darling Sons
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Their frail Original, and faded bliss,
Faded so soon.  Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain Empires.  Thus Beelzebub

Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devised
By Satan, and in part proposed: for whence,
But from the Author of all ill could Spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to spite
The great Creator? But their spite still serves
His glory to augment.  The bold design
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy
Sparkled in all their eyes; with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews.



Well have ye judged, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are,
Great things resolved; which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spite of Fate,
Nearer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms
And opportune excursion we may chance
Re-enter Heaven; or else in some mild Zone
Dwell not unvisited of Heavens fair Light
Secure, and at the brightening Orient beam
Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air,
To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires
Shall breathe her balm.  But first whom shall we send
In search of this new world, whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandering feet
The dark unbottomed infinite Abyss
And through the palpable obscure find out 

His uncouth way, or spread his aerie flight
Up-born with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy Isle; what strength, what art can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe
Through the strict Sentries and Stations thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumspection, and wee now no less
Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send,
The weight of all and our last hope relies.



This said, he sat; and expectation held
His look suspense, awaiting who appeared
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt: but all sat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each
In others countenance read his own dismay
Astonished: none among the choice and prime
Of those Heaven-warring Champions could be found
So hardy as to proffer or accept
Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last

Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised
Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spake.



O Progeny of Heaven, Imperial Thrones,
With reason hath deep silence and demure
Seized us, though undismayed: long is the way
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light;
Our prison strong, this huge convex of Fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant
Barred over us prohibit all egress.
These past, if any pass, the void profound
Of inessential Night receives him next
Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being 

Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf.
If thence he escape into whatever world,
Or unknown Region, what remains him less
Then unknown dangers and as hard escape.
But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers,
And this Imperial Sovereignty, adorned
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
And judged of public moment, in the shape
Of difficulty or danger could deter
Me  some copies have me  from  attempting. 
Wherefore do I assume
These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who Reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more, as he above the rest
High honoured sits? Go therefore mighty Powers,
Terror of Heaven, though fallen; intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tolerable; if there be cure or charm
To respite or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad
Through all the Coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all: this enterprise
None shall partake with me.   Thus
saying rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply,
Prudent, least from his resolution raised
Others among the chief might offer now
(Certain to be refused) what erst they feared;
And so refused might in opinion stand
His Rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn.  But they
Dreaded not more the adventure then his voice

Forbidding; and at once with him they rose;
Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of Thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone; and as a God
Extol him equal to the highest in Heaven:
Nor failed they to express how much they praised,
That for the general safety he despised
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned
Loose all her virtue; least bad men should boast
Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or close ambition varnished o'er with zeal.
Thus they their doubtful consultations dark
Ended rejoicing in their matchless Chief:
As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, overspread
Heavens cheerful face, the lowering Element
Scowls ore the darkened landscape Snow, or shower;
If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with Devil damned
Firm concord holds, men only disagree
Of Creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars,
Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish foes enough besides,
That day and night for his destruction wait.


The Stygian Counsel thus dissolved; and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers,
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemed 

Alone the Antagonist of Heaven, nor less
Than Hells dread Emperor with pomp Supreme,
And God-like imitated State; him round
A Globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed
With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms.
Then of their Session ended they bid cry
With Trumpets regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding Alchemy
By Heralds voice explained: the hollow A