
Paradise Lost. BOOK X.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            Mans transgression known, the Guardian Angels forsake
Paradise, and return up to Heaven to approve  their
vigilance, and are approved, God declaring that The entrance  of Satan
could not be by them prevented. He sends his Son to  judge the
Transgressors, who descends and gives Sentence  accordingly; then
in pity clothes them both, and rescinds. Sin  and Death
sitting till then at the Gates of Hell, by wondrous  simonpathie
feeling the success of Satan in this new World,  and the sin
by Man there committed, resolve to sit no longer  confined in Hell, but
to follow Satan their Sire up to the place  of Man: To make the
way easier from Hell to this World to and  fro, they pave a broad Highway
or Bridge over Chaos,  according to the Track that Satan
first made; then preparing  for Earth, they meet him proud of his
success returning to Hell;  their mutual gratulation. Satan
arrives at Pandemonium,  in full of assembly relates with
boasting his                        
 success against Man; instead of  applause is entercoined
with a general hiss by all his  audience, tranceformed with himself
also suddenly into  Serpents, according to his doom given in       
                          
Paradise; then deluded with a show of the  forbidden Tree
springing up before them, they greedily reaching  to take  of the Fruit,
chew dust and bitter ashes.  The  proceedings of Sin and Death;
God foretells the final Victory  of his Son over them, and the renewing
of all things; but for the  present commands his Angels to make several
altartions in  the Heavens and Elements. Adam more and
more perceiving his  fallen condition heavily bewails, rejects the
consolement of 
Eve; she persists and at length appeases him: then to evade
the  Curse likely to fall on their Offspring, proposes to Adam
violent  ways which he approves not, but conceiving better hope, puts
her  in mind of the late Promise made them, that her Seed should be 
revenged on the Serpent, and exhorts her with him to seek Peace  of the
offended Deity, by repentance and supplication.


MEanwhile the heinous and despiteful act
Of Satan done in Paradise, and how
He in the Serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her Husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven; for what can escape the Eye
Of God All-seeing, or deceive his Heart
Omniscient, who in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire, and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulsed
Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered
The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit,

Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,
Incurred, what could they less, the penalty,
And manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
the Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad
For Man, for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen.  Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heaven Gate, displeased
All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare
That time Celestial visages, yet mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the new-arrived, in multitudes
the Ethereal People ran, to hear and know
How all befell: they towards the Throne Supreme
Accountable made haste to make appear
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance,
And easily approved; when the most High
Eternal Father from his secret Cloud,
Amidst in Thunder uttered thus his voice.



Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge, be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the Earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent,
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this Tempter crossed the Gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail and speed
On his bad Errand, Man should be seduced
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker; no Decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his Fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free Will, to her own inclining left
In even scale.  But fallen he is, and now

What rests but that the mortal Sentence pass
On his transgression, Death denounced that day,
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke; but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee
Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferred
All Judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
Easy it might be seen that I intend
Mercy colleague with Justice, sending thee
Mans Friend, his Mediator, his designed
Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.



So spake the Father, and unfolding bright
Toward the right hand his Glory, on the Son
Blazed forth unclouded Deity; he full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild.



Father Eternal, thine is to decree,
Mine both in Heaven and Earth to do thy will
Supreme, that thou in me thy Son beloved
May ever rest well pleased.  I go to judge
On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou know,
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be, for so I undertook
Before thee; and not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me derived, yet I shall temper so
Justice with Mercy, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none
Are to behold the Judgment, but the judged,

Those two; the third best absent is condemned,
Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law
Conviction to the Serpent none belongs.



Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose
Of high collateral glory: him Thrones and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant
Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence

Eden and all the Coast in prospect lay.
Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged.
Now was the Sun in Western cadence low
From Noon, and gentle Aires due at their hour
To fan the Earth now waked, and usher in
The Evening cool when he from wrath more cool
Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both
To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard
Now walking in the Garden, by soft winds
Brought to their Ears, while day declined, they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud.



Where art thou Adam, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off? I miss thee here,
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude,
Where obvious duty meanwhile appeared unsought:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth.

 He came, and with him Eve,
more loath, though first
To offend, discountenanced both, and discomposed;
Love was not in their looks, either to God
Or to each other, but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam faltering long, thus answered brief.



I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice

Afraid, being naked, hid my self. 
To whom
The gracious judge without revile replied.



My voice thou oft has heard, and has not feared,
But still rejoiced, how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who
Hath told thee? has thou eaten of the Tree
Whereof I gave thee charge thou should not eat?



To whom thus Adam sore beset  replied.

 O Heaven! in evil strait this day I
stand
Before my judge, either to undergo
My self the total Crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life;
Whose failing, while her Faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint; but strict necessity
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
Least on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Would easily detect what I conceal.
This Woman whom thou made to be my help,
And gave me as thy perfect gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so Divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in it self,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed;
She gave me of the Tree, and I did eat.



To whom the soverign Presence thus replied.

 Was she thy God, that her thou
did obey
Before his voice, or was she made thy guide,
Superior, or but equal, that to her
Thou did resign thy Manhood, and the Place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled

Hers in all real dignity: Adorned
She was indeed, and lovely to attract
Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts
Were such as under Government well seemed,
Unseemly to bear rule, which was thy part
And person, had thou known thy self aright.



So having said, he thus to Eve in  few:

 Say Woman, what is this which
thou has done?



To whom sad Eve with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied.



The Serpent me beguiled and I did eat.



Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To Judgement he proceeded on the accused
Serpent though brute, unable to transfer
The Guilt on him who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his Creation; justly then accursed,
As vitiated in Nature: more to know
Concerned not Man (since he no further knew)
Nor altered his offence; yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.



Because thou has done this, thou art accursed
Above all Cattle, each Beast of the Field;
Upon thy Belly grovelling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy Life.
Between Thee and the Woman I will put
Enmity, and between thine and her Seed;
Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.



So spake this Oracle, then verified
When Jesus son of Mary second Eve,
Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heaven,


Prince of the Air; then rising from his Grave
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumph
In open show, and with ascention bright
Captivity led captive through the Air,
The Realm it self of Satan long usurped,
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet;
Even he who now foretold his fatal bruise,
And to the Woman thus his Sentence turned.





Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will
Thine shall submit, he over thee shall rule.



On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced.

 Because thou has hearkened to the
voice of thy  Wife,
And eaten of the Tree concerning which
I charged thee, saying: Thou shalt not eat thereof,
Cursed is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof all the days of thy Life;
Thorns also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid, and thou shalt eat th'Herb of th'Field,
In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eat Bread,
Till thou return unto the ground, for thou
Out of the ground was taken, know thy Birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.



So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent,
And th'instant stroke of Death denounced that day
Removed far off; then pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume,
As when he washed his servants feet so now
As Father of his Family he clad
Their nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain,
Or as the Snake with youthful Coat repaid;

And thought not much to cloth his Enemies:
Nor he their outward only with the Skins
Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more
Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness,
Arraying covered from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returned,
Into his blissful bosom reassumed
In glory as of old, to him appeased
All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Meanwhile ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth,
Within the Gates of Hell sate Sin and Death,
In counterview within the Gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through,
Sin opening, who thus now to Death began.



O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idly, while Satan our great Author thrives
In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides
For us his offspring dear; It cannot be
But that success attends him; if mishap