
            Paradise Lost. Book II.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            The Consultation begun, Satan debates whether anothere
Battle be to be hazarded for the recovery of Heyven: some  advise
it, others dissuade:  A third proposal is preferred,  mentioned
before by Satan to search the truth of that Prophecy  or
Tradition in Heaven concerning another world, and another kind  of creature
equal or not much inferior to themselves, about  this time to be
created:  Their doubt who shall be sent on this  difficult search: Satan
their chief undertakes alone the  voyage, is honoured and applauded.
 The Council thus ended,  the rest betake them several ways and to
several employments, as  their inclinations lead them, to entertain the
time till 
Satan return.  He passes on his Journey to Hell Gates, 
finds them shut, and who sat there to guard them, by whom at  length
they are opened, and discover to him the great Gulf between  Hell and
Heaven;  with what difficulty he passes through,  directed by Chaos,
the Power of that place, to the sight of  this new World which he
sought.



HIgh on a Throne of Royal State, which far
Outshone the wealth of Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showers on her Kings Barbaric Pearl and Gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised
To that bad eminence; and from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain War with Heaven, and by success untaught
His proud imaginations thus displayed.



Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven,
For since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen,
I give not Heaven for lost.  From this descent
Celestial virtues rising, will appear
More glorious and more dread then from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate:
Me though just right, and the fixed Laws of Heaven
Did first create your Leader, next free choice,
With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight,
Hath bin achieved of merit, yet this loss
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
Established in a safe unenvied Throne
Yielded with full consent.  The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? where there is then no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From Faction; for none sure will claim in Hell 

Precedence, none, whose portion is so small
Of present pain, that with ambitious mind
Will covet more.  With this advantage then
To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord,
More then can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper then prosperity
Could have assured us; and by what best way,
Whether of open War or covert guile,
We now debate; who can advise, may speak.



He ceased, and next him Moloc, Sceptred King
Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heaven; now fiercer by despair:
His trust was with the Eternal to be deemed
Equal in strength, and rather then be less
Cared not to be at all; with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse
He reckoned not, and these words thereafter spake.



My sentence is for open War: Of Wiles,
More inexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need, not now.
For while they sit contriving, shall the rest,
Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait
The Signal to ascend, sit lingering here
Heavens fugitives, and for their dwelling place
Accept this dark opprobrious Den of shame,
The Prison of his Tyranny who Reigns
By our delay? no, let us rather choose
Armed with Hell flames and fury all at once
O'er Heavens high Towers to force resistless way,
Turning our Tortures into horrid Arms
Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise
Of his Almighty Engine he shall hear
Infernal Thunder, and for Lightning see 

Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels; and his Throne it self
Mixed with Tartarean Sulphur, and strange fire,
His own invented Torments.  But perhaps
The way seems difficult and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe.
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful Lake benumm not still,
That in our proper motion we ascend
Up to our native seat: descent and fall
To us is adverse.  Who but felt of late
When the fierce Foe hung on our broken Rear
Insulting, and pursued us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? The ascent is easy then;
The event is feared; should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction: if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroyed: what can be worse
Then to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned
In this abhorred deep to utter woe;
Where pain of inextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end
The Vassals of his anger, when the Scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing hour
Calls us to Penance? More destroyed then thus
We should be quite abolished and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which to the height enraged,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essential, happier far
Then miserable to have eternal being:
Or if our substance be indeed Divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst 

On this side nothing; and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven,
And with perpetual inroads to Alarm,
Though inaccessible, his fatal Throne:
Which if not Victory is yet Revenge.



He ended frowning, and his look denounced
Desperate revenge, and Battle dangerous
To less then Gods.  On the other side up rose

Belial, in act more graceful and humane;
A fairer person lost not Heaven; he seemed
For dignity composed and high exploit:
But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue
Dropped Manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low;
To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful: yet he pleased the ear,
And with persuasive accent thus began.



I should be much for open War, O Peers,
As not behind in hate; if what was urged
Main reason to persuade immediate War,
Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success:
When he who most excels in fact of Arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what Revenge? the Towers of Heaven are filled
With Armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep
Encamp their Legions, or with obscure wing
Scout far and wide into the Realm of night,
Scorning surprise.  Or could we break our way 

By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest Insurrection, to confound
Heavens purest Light, yet our great Enemy
All incorruptible would on his Throne
Sit unpolluted, and the Ethereal mould
Incapable of stain would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire
Victorious.  Thus repulsed, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
The Almighty Victor to spend all his rage,
And that must end us, that must be our cure,
To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through Eternity,
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated night,
Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? how he can
Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence, or unaware,
To give his Enemies their wish, and end
Them in his anger, whom his anger saves
To punish endless? wherefore cease we then?
Say they who counsel War, we are decreed,
Reserved and destined to Eternal woe;
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse? is this then worst,
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms?
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
With Heavens afflicting Thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seemed
A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay 


Chained on the burning Lake? that sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires
Awaked should blow them into sevenfold rage
And plunge us in the flames? or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? what if all
Her stores were opened, and this Firmament
Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire,
Impending horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery Tempest shall be hurled
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling Ocean, wrapped in Chains;
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd,
Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse.
War therefore, open or concealed, alike
My voice dissuades; for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? he from heavens height
The final h was inked in in some copies of the 1674
edition, apparently at the Simmons' press.

All these our motions vain, sees and derides;
Not more Almighty to resist our might
Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we then live thus vile, the Race  some 
copies have race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled to suffer here
Chains and these Torments? better these then worse
By my advice; since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree,
The Victors will.  To suffer, as to doe,
Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust
That so ordains: this was at first resolved,
If we were wise, against so great a foe 

Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold
And venturous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
What yet they know must follow, to endure
Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of their Conqueror: This is now
Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps thus far removed
Not mind us not offending, satisfied
With what is punished; whence these raging fires
Will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapour, or inured not feel,
Or changed at length, and to the place conformed
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain;
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light,
Besides what hope the never-ending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waiting, since our present lot appears
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to our selves more woe.



Thus Belial with words clothed in reasons  garb
Counselled ignoble ease, and peaceful sloth,
Not peace: and after him thus Mammon spake.



Either to disinthrone the King of Heaven
We war, if war be best, or to regain
Our own right lost : him to unthrone we then
May hope when everlasting Faith shall yield
To fickle Chance and Chaos judge the strife:
The former vain to hope argues as vain
The latter: for what place can be for us
Within Heavens bound, unless Heavens Lord supreme 


We overpower? Suppose he should relent
And publish Grace to all, on promise made
Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict Laws imposed, to celebrate his Throne
With warbled Hymns, and to his Godhead sing
Forced Halleluiahs; while he Lordly sits
Our envied Soverign, and his Altar breathes
Ambrosial Odours and Ambrosial Flowers,
Our servile of