et not lost

All her Original brightness, nor appeared
Less then Arch Angel ruined, and the excess
Of Glory obscured:  As when the Sun new risen
Looks through the Horizontal misty Air
Shorn of his Beams, or from behind the Moon
In dim Eclipse disastrous twilight sheds
On half the Nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes Monarch. Darkened so, yet shone
Above them all the Arch Angel; but his face
Deep scars of Thunder had entrenched, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under Brows
Of dauntless courage, and considerate Pride
Waiting revenge: cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss) condemned
For ever now to have their lot in pain,
Millions of Spirits for his fault amerced
Of Heaven, and from Eternal Splendours flung
For his revolt, yet faithful how they stood,
Their Glory withered.  As when Heavens Fire
Hath scathed the Forest Oaks, or Mountain Pines,
With singed top their stately growth though bare
Stands on the blasted Heath. He now prepared
To speak; whereat their doubled Ranks they bend
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round
With all his Peers: attention held them mute.
Thrice he assayed, and thrice in spite of scorn,
Tears such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last
Words interwove with sighs found out their way.





O Myriads of immortal Spirits, O Powers
Matchless, but with the Almighty, and that strife
Was not inglorious, though the event was dire,
As this place testifies, and this dire change


Hateful to utter: but what power of mind
Foreseeing or presaging, from the Depth
Of knowledge past or present, could have feared,
How such united force of Gods, how such
As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
For who can yet believe, though after loss,
That all these puissant Legions, whose exile
Hath emptied Heaven, shall fail to re-ascend
Self-raised, and repossess their native seat?
For me be witness all the Host of Heaven,
If counsels different, or danger shunned
By me  some copies have me ,  have lost our
hopes.  But he who reigns
Monarch in Heaven, till then as one secure
Sat on his Throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custom, and his Regal State
Put forth at full, but still his strength concealed,
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New war, provoked; our better part remains
To work in close design, by fraud or guile
What force effected not: that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force, hath overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife
There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation, whom his choice regard
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven:
Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps
Our first eruption, thither or elsewhere:
For this Infernal Pit shall never hold
C??lestial Spirits in Bondage, nor the Abyss
Long under darkness cover.  But these thoughts

Full Counsel must mature: Peace is despaired,
For who can think Submission? War then, War
Open or understood must be resolved.





He spake: and to confirm his words, out-flew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze
Far round illumined hell: highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped Arms
Clashed on their sounding Shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the Vault of Heaven.


There stood a Hill not far whose grisly top
Belched fire and rolling smoke; the rest entire
Shone with a glossy scurff, undoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic Ore,
The work of Sulphur.  Thither winged with speed
A numerous Brigad hastened.  As when Bands
Of Pioners with Spade and Pickax armed
Forerun the Royal Camp, to trench a Field,
Or cast a Rampart.  Mammon led them on,

Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell
From heaven, for even in heaven his looks and thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of Heavens pavement, trodden Gold,
Then aught divine or holy else enjoyed
In vision beatific: by him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransacked the Center, and with impious hands
Rifled the bowels of their mother Earth
For Treasures better hid.  Soon had his crew
Opened into the Hill a spacious wound
And dug out ribs of Gold.  Let none admire
That riches grow in Hell; that soil may best
Deserve the precious bane.  And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wondering tell


Of Babel, and the works of Memphian Kings
Learn how their greatest Monuments of Fame,
And Strength and Art are easily out-done
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour
What in an age they with incessant toil
And hands innumerable scarce perform.
Nigh on the Plain in many cells prepared,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluiced from the Lake, a second multitude
With wondrous Art found out the massy Ore,
Severing each kind, and scummed the Bullion dross:
A third as soon had formed within the ground
A various mould, and from the boiling cells
By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook,
As in an Organ from one blast of wind
To many a row of Pipes the sound-board breaths.Fletcher

Anon out of the earth a Fabric huge
Rose like an Exhalation, with the sound
Of Dulcet Symphonies and voices sweet,
Built like a Temple, where Pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With Golden Architrave; nor did there want
Cornice or Freeze, with bossy Sculptures graven,
The Roof was fretted Gold.  Not Babilon,
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equalled in all their glories, to enshrine

Belus or Serapis their Gods, or seat
Their Kings, when ??gypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxury. The ascending pile
Stood fixed her stately height, and strait the doors
Opening their brazen folds discover wide
Within, her ample spaces, o'er the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof
Pendant by subtle Magic many a row

Of Starry Lamps and blazing Cressets fed
With Naphtha and Asphaltus yielded 
light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring entered, and the work some praise
And some the Architect: his hand was known
In Heaven by many a Towered structure high,
Where Sceptred Angels held their residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King                  
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright.
Nor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land
Men called him Mulciber; and how he fell
From Heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove

Sheer o'er the Crystal Battlements; from Morn
To Noon he fell, from Noon to dewy Eve,
A Summers day; and with the setting Sun
Dropped from the Zenith like a falling Star,
On Lemnos the ??g??an Isle: thus they
relate,
Erring; for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before; nor aught availed him now
To have built in Heaven high Towers; nor did he escape
By all his Engines, but was headlong sent
With his industrious crew to build in hell.
Mean while the winged Heralds by command
Of soverign power, with awful Ceremony
And Trumpets sound throughout the Host proclaim
A solemn Council forthwith to be held
At Pand??monium, the high Capital
Of Satan and his Peers: their summons called
From every Band and squared Regiment
By place or choice the worthiest; they anon
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came
Attended: all access was thronged, the Gates

And Porches wide, but chief the spacious Hall
(Though like a covered field, where Champions bold
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldans chair
Defied the best of Panim chivalry
To mortal combat or career with Lance)
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,
Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings.  As Bees
In spring time, when the Sun with Taurus rides,
Pour forth their populous youth about the Hive
In clusters;  they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed Plank,
The suburb of their Straw-built Citadel,
New rubbed with Baum, expatiate and confer
Their State affairs. So thick the aerie crowd
Swarmed and were straightened; till the Signal given,
Behold a wonder! they but now who seemed
In bigness to surpass Earths Giant Sons
Now less then smallest Dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberless, like that Pigmean Race         
Beyond the Indian Mount, or Fairy Elves,
Whose midnight Revels, by a Forest side
Or Fountain some belated Peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while over-head the Moon
Sits Arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course, they on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund Music charm his ear;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still amidst the Hall
Of that infernal Court. But far within
And in their own dimensions like themselves
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim

In close recess and secret conclave sat
A thousand demigods on golden seat's,
Frequent and full.  After short silence then
And summons read, the great consult began.
The End of the First Book.

