s Guardians bright;
Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeared
In Dothan, covered with a Camp of Fire,
Against the Syrian King, who to surprise
One man, Assassin-like had levied War,
War unproclam'd.  The Princely Hierarch
In their bright stand, there left his Powers to seize
Possession of the Garden; he alone,
To find where Adam sheltered, took his way,
Not unperceived of Adam, who to Eve,
While the great Visitant approached, thus spake.




Eve, now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determine, or impose
New Laws to be observed; for I descry
From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill
One of the heavenly Host, and by his Gate
None of the meanest, some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above, such Majesty
Invests him coming? yet not terrible,
That I should fear, nor sociably mild,
As Raphael, that I should much confide,
But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended; and The Arch-Angel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man
Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Arms
A military Vest of purple flowed
Livelier then Melib??an, or the grain
Of Sarra, worn by Kings and Hero's old


In time of Truce; lris had dipped the wooff;
His starry Helm unbuckled showed him prime
In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side
As in a glistening Zodiac hung the Sword,
Satan's dire dread, and in his hand the Spear.

Adam bowd low, he Kingly from his State
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.




Adam, Heavens high behest no Preface needs:
Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death,
Then due by sentence when thou did transgress,
Defeated of his seizure many days
Given thee of Grace, wherein thou may repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
May cover: well may then thy Lord appeased
Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claim;
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not; to remove thee I am come,
And send thee from the Garden forth to till
The ground whence thou was taken, fitter Soil.





He added not, for Adam at the news
Heart-strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound; Eve, who unseen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Discovered soon the place of her retire.



O unexpected stroke, worse then of Death!
Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave
Thee Native Soil, these happy Walks and Shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend,
Quiet though sad, the respite of that day
That must be mortal to us both.  O flours,
That never will in other Climate grow,
My early visitation, and my last
At Even, which I bred up with tender hand
From the first opening bud, and gave ye Names,

Who now shall rear ye to the Sun, or rank
Your Tribes, and water from th'ambrosial Fount?
Thee lastly nuptial Bower, by me adorned
With what to sight or smell was sweet; from thee
How shall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower World, to this obscure
And wilde, how shall we breath in other Air
Less pure, accustomed to immortal Fruits?



Whom thus the Angel interrupted mild.

 Lament not Eve, but
patiently resign
What justly thou has lost; nor set thy heart,
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine;
Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes
Thy Husband, him to follow thou art bound;
Where he abides, think there thy native soil.




Adam by this from the cold sudden damp
Recovering, and his scattered spirits returned,
To Michael thus his humble words addressed.



Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named
Of them the Highest, for such of shape may seem
Prince above Princes, gently has thou told
Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
And in performing end us; what besides
Of sorrow and dejection and despair
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our sweet
Recess, and only consolation left
Familiar to our eyes, all places else
Inhospitable appear and desolate,
Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer
Incessant I could hope to change the will
Of him who all things can, I would not cease
To weary him with my assiduous cries:
But prayer against his absolute Decree


No more avails then breath against the wind,
Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth:
Therefore to his great bidding I submit.
This most afflicts me, that departing hence,
As from his face I shall be hid, deprived
His blessed countenance; here I could frequent,
With worship, place by place where he vouchsafed
Presence Divine, and to my Sons relate;
On this Mount he appeared, under this Tree
Stood visible, among these Pines his voice
I heard, here with him at this Fountain talked:
So many grateful Altars I would rear
Of grassy Turf, and pile up every Stone
Of lustre from the brook, in memory,
Or monument to Ages, and thereon
Offer sweet smelling Gumms and Fruits and Flours:
In yonder nether World where shall I seek
His bright appearances, or foot step-trace?
For though I fled him angry, yet recalled
To life prolonged and promised Race, I now
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts
Of glory, and far off his steps adore.



To whom thus Michael with regard benign.

Adam, thou know Heaven his, and all the Earth. 
Not this Rock only; his Omnipresence fills
Land, Sea, and Air, and every kind that lives,
Fomented by his virtual power and warmd:
All the Earth he gave thee to possess and rule,
No despicable gift; surmise not then
His presence to these narrow bounds confined
Of Paradise or Eden: this had been
Perhaps thy Capital Seat, from whence had spread
All generations, and had hither come
From all the ends of the Earth, to celebrate

And reverence thee their great Progenitor.
But this pr??eminence thou has lost, brought down
To dwell on even ground now with thy Sons:
Yet doubt not but in Valley and in plain
God is as here, and will be found alike
Present, and of his presence many a sign
Still following thee, still compassing thee round
With goodness and paternal Love, his Face
Express, and of his steps the track Divine.
Which that thou may believe, and be confirmed
Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent
To show thee what shall come in future days
To thee and to thy Offspring; good with bad
Expect to hear, supernal Grace contending
With sinfulness of Men; thereby to learn
True patience, and to temper joy with fear
And pious sorrow, equally inured
By moderation either state to bear,
Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead
Safest thy life, and best prepared endure
Thy mortal passage when it comes.  Ascend
This Hill; let Eve (for I have drenched her eyes)
Here sleep below while thou to foresight wake,
As once thou sleeps, while She to life was formed.



To whom thus Adam gratefully replied.

 Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide,
the path
Thou lead me, and to the hand of Heaven submit,
However chast'ning, to the evil turn
My obvious breast, arming to overcome
By suffering, and earn rest from labour won,
If so I may attain.  So both ascend
In the Visions of God: It was a Hill
Of Paradise the highest, from whose top
The Hemisphere of Earth in clearest Ken

Stretched out to the amplest reach
Not higher that Hill nor wider looking round,
Whereon for different cause the Tempter set
Our second Adam in the Wilderness,
To show him all Earths Kingdoms and their Glory.
His Eye might there command wherever stood
City of old or modern Fame, the Seat
Of mightiest Empire, from the destined Walls
Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can

And Samarchand by Oxus, Temirs Throne,
To Paquin of Sin??an Kings, and thence
To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul

Down to the golden Chersonese, or where
The Persian in Ecbatan sate, or since
In Hispahan, or where the Russian Ksar

In Mosco, or the Sultan in Bizance,

Turchestan-born; nor could his eye not ken
Th'Empire of Negus to his utmost Port

Ercoco and the less Maritime Kings

Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind,
And Sofala thought Ophir, to the Realm
Of Congo, and Angola farthest South;
Or thence from Niger Flood to Atlas Mount
The Kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Suss,

Morocco and Algiers, and Tremisen;
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway
The World: in Spirit perhaps he also saw
Rich Mexico the seat of Motezume,
And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat
Of Atabalipa, and yet unspoiled

Guiana, whose great City Geryons Sons
Call El Dorado: but to nobler sights

Michael from Adams eyes the Film removed
Which that false Fruit that promised clearer sight

Had bred; then purged with Euphrasie and Rue
The visual Nerve, for he had much to see;
And from the Well of Life three drops instilled.
So deep the power of these Ingredients pierced,
Even to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That Adam now enforced to close his eyes,
Sunk down and all his Spirits became entranced:
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon raised, and his attention thus recalled.




Adam, now open thine eyes, and first behold
Th'effects which thy original crime hath wrought
In some to spring from thee, who never touched
Th'excepted Tree, nor with the Snake conspired,
Nor sinned thy sin, yet from that derive
Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds.



His eyes he opened, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were Sheaves
New reaped, the other part sheep-walks and folds;
in the midst an Altar as the Land-mark stood
Rustic, of grassy sord; thither anon
A sweaty Reaper from his Tillage brought
First Fruits, the green Ear, and the yellow Sheaf,
Uncalled, as came to hand; a Shepherd next
More meek came with the Firstlings of his Flock
Choicest and best; then sacrificing, laid
The Inwards and their Fat, with Incense strewed,
On the cleft Wood, and all due Rites performed.
His Offering soon propitious Fire from Heaven
Consumed with nimble glance, and grateful steam;
The others not, for his was not sincere;
Whereat he inlie raged, and as they talked,
Smote him into the Midriff with a stone
That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale
Groaned out his Soul with gushing blood effus'd.

Much at that sight was Adam in his heart
Dismay