byss
Heard far and wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafening shout, returned them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease their minds and somewhat raised
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers
Disband, and wandering, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain
The irksome hours, till this great Chief return.
Part on the Plain, or in the Air sublime
Upon the wing, or in swift Race contend,
As at theOlympian Games or Pythian fields;
Part curb their fiery Steeds, or shun the Goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads form.
As when to warn proud Cities war appears
Waged in the troubled Sky, and Armies rush
To Battle in the Clouds, before each Van
Prick forth the Aerie Knights, and couch their Spears
Till thickest Legions close; with feats of Arms
From either end of Heaven the welkin burns.
Others with vast Typh??an rage more fell
Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air
In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wilde uproar.
As when Alcides from Oechalia Crowned 

With conquest, felt the envenomed robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots Thessalian Pines,
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw
Into theEuboic Sea.  Others more mild,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes Angelical to many a Harp
Their own Heroic deeds and hapless fall
By doom of Battle; and complain that Fate
Free Virtue should enthral to Force or Chance.
Their Song was partial, but the harmony
(What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?)
Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience.  In discourse more sweet
(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense,)
Others apart sat on a Hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate,
Fixed Fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and Apathy, and glory and shame,
Vain wisdom all, and false Philosophy:
Yet with a pleasing sorcery could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm the obdured breast
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part in Squadrons and gross Bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any Clime perhaps
Might yield them easier habitation, bend
Four ways their flying March, along the Banks
Of four infernal Rivers that disgorge
Into the burning Lake their baleful streams; 

Abhorred Styx the flood of deadly hate,
Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep;

Cocytus, named of lamentation loud
Heard on the rueful stream; fierce Phlegeton

Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Far off from these a slow and silent stream,

Lethe the River of Oblivion roules
Her watery Labyrinth, whereof who drinks,
Forthwith his former state and being forgets,
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen Continent
Lies dark and wilde, beat with perpetual storms
Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound as that Serbonian Bog
Betwixt Damiata and mount Casius old,
Where Armies whole have sunk: the parching Air
Burns frore, and cold performs the effect of Fire.
Thither by harpy-footed Furies hailed,
At certain revolutions all the damned
Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce,
From Beds of raging Fire to starve in Ice
Their soft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixt, and frozen round,
Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this Lethean Sound
Both to and fro, their sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to loose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so near the brink;
But Fate  some copies have fate           withstands, and to oppose the attempt 


Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards
The Ford, and of it self the water flies
All taste of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of Tantalus.  Thus roving on
In confused march forlorn, the adventrous Bands
With shuddering horror pale, and eyes aghast
Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found
No rest: through many a dark and dreary Veil
They passed, and many a Region dolorous,
O'er many a Frozen, many a fiery Alpe,
Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and shades of death,
A Universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good,
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,
Abominable, unutterable, and worse
Than Fables yet have feigned, or fear conceived,

Gorgons and Hydra's, and 
Chimera's dire.


Mean while the Adversary of God and Man,

Satan with thoughts inflamed of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and towards the Gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight; some times
He scours the right hand coast, some times the left,
Now shaves with level wing the Deep, then soars
Up to the fiery Concave touring high.
As when far off at Sea a Fleet descried
Hangs in the Clouds, by ??quinoctial Winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the Isles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence Merchants bring
Their spicie Drugs: they on the Trading Flood
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape
Ply stemming nightly toward the Pole.  So seemed
Far off the flying Fiend: at last appear
Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof, 

And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass,
Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock,
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire,
Yet unconsumed.  Before the Gates there sat
On either side a formidable shape;
The one seemed Woman to the waste, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fouled
Voluminous and vast, a Serpent armed
With mortal sting: about her middle round
A cry of Hell Hounds never ceasing barked
With wide Cerberian mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous Peal: yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb,
And kennel there, yet there still barked and howled,
Within unseen.  Far less abhorred than these
Vexed Scylla bathing in the Sea that parts

Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore:
Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when called
In secret, riding through the Air she comes
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland Witches, while the labouring Moon
Eclipses at their charms.  The other shape,
If shape it might be called that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb,
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed either; black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful Dart; what seemed his head
The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on.

Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The Monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode.
The undaunted Fiend what this might be admired, Admired, not feared;
God and his Son except, 

Created thing nought valued he nor shunned;
And with disdainful look thus first began.



Whence and what art thou, execrable shape,
That dare, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated Front athwart my way
To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee:
Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven.



To whom the Goblin full of wrath replied,

Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and Faith, till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious Arms
Drew after him the third part of Heavens Sons
Conjured against the highest, for which both Thou
And they outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste Eternal days  some copies have days  in woe and pain?
And reckons thou thy self with Spirits of Heaven,
Hell-doomed, and breath defiance here and scorn
Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more,
Thy King and Lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings,
Least with a whip of Scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this Dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before.



So spake the grisly terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold
More dreadful and deform: on the other side
Incensed  some copies have Licenced with indignation Satan stood
Unterrifi'd, and like a Comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiucus huge
In the Arctic Sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes Pestilence and War. Each at the Head
Leveled his deadly aim; their fatal hands 


No second stroke intend, and such a frown
Each cast at the other, as when two black Clouds
With Heavens Artillery fraught, come rattling on
Over the Caspian, then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till Winds the signal blow
To join their dark Encounter in mid air:
So frowned the mighty Combatants, that Hell
Grew darker at their frown, so matched they stood;
For never but once more was either like
To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds
Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the Snaky Sorceress that sat
Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between.



O Father, what intends thy hand, 
she  cried,

Against thy only Son? What fury O Son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart
Against thy Fathers head? and know for whom;
For him who sits above and laughs the while
At thee ordained his drudge, to execute
What ever his wrath, which he calls justice, bids,
His wrath which one day will destroy ye both.



She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore, then these to her Satan returned:



So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposes, that my sudden hand
Prevented spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends; till first I know of thee,
What thing thou art, thus double-formed, and why
In this infernal Veil first met thou call
Me Father, and that Phantasm call my Son?
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable then him and thee. 




They whom thus the Portress of Hell Gate replied;

has thou forgot me then, and do I seem
Now in thine eyes so foul, once deemed so fair
In Heaven, when at The Assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
In bold conspiracy against Heavens King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprised thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzy swum
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
Then shining heavenly fair, a Goddess armed
Out of thy head I sprung: amazement seized
All the Host of Heaven; back they recoiled afraid
At first, and called me Sin, and for a Sign
Portentous held me; but familiar grown,
I pleased, and with attractive graces won
The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft
Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing
Became enamoured, and such joy thou took
With me in secret, that my womb conceived
A growing burden.  Mean while War arose,
And fields were fought in Heaven; wherein remained
(For what could else) to our Almighty Foe
Clear Victory, to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean: down they fell
Driven headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep, and in the general fall
I also; at which time this powerful Key
Into my hand was given, with charge to keep
These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my opening.  Pensive here I sat
Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb 


Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou see
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way
Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain
Distorted, 