With all his Legions to dislodge, and leave
Unworshipt, unobeyed the Throne supreme
Contemptuous, and his next subordinate
Awning, thus to him in secret spake.





sleeps thou Companion dear, what sleep can close
Thy eye-lids: and remember what Decree 

Of yesterday, so late hath past the lips
Of Heavens Almighty. Thou to me thy thoughts
Was wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;
Both waking we were one; how then can now
Thy sleep dissent? new Laws thou see imposed;
New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
In us who serve, new Counsels, to debate
What doubtful may ensue, more in this place
To utter is not safe. Assemble thou
Of all those Myriads which we lead the chief;
Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night
Her shadowy Cloud withdraws, I am to haste,
And all who under me their Banners wave,
Homeward with flying march where we possess
The Quarters of the North, there to prepare
Fit entertainment to receive our King
The great Messiah, and his new commands,
Who speedily through all the Hierarchies
Intends to pass triumphant, and give Laws.



So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infused
Bad influence into th'unwarie breast
Of his Associate; he together calls,
Or several one by one, the Regent Powers,
Under him Regent, tells, as he was taught,
That the most High commanding, now ere Night,
Now ere dim Night had disincumberd Heaven,
The great Hierarchal Standard was to move;
Tells the suggested cause, and casts between
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound
Or taint integrity; but all obeyed
The wonted signal, and superior voice
Of their great Potentate; for great indeed
His name, and high was his degree in Heaven; 

His countenance, as the Morning Star that guides
The starry flock, allured them, and with lies
Drew after him the third part of Heavens Host:
Mean while the Eternal eye, whose sight discerns
Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy Mount
And from within the golden Lamps that burn
Nightly before him, saw without their light
Rebellion rising, saw in whom, how spread
Among the sons of Morn, what multitudes
Were banded to oppose his high Decree;
And smiling to his only Son thus said.



Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,
Nearly it now concerns us to be sure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of Deity or Empire, such a foe
Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North;
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try
In battle, what our Power is, or our right.
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw
With speed what force is left, and all employ
In our defence, lest unawares we lose
This our high place, our Sanctuary, our Hill.



To whom the Son with calm aspect and clear
Lightning Divine, ineffable, serene,
Made answer.  Mighty Father, thou
thy foes
Justly has in derision, and secure
Laugh at their vain designs and tumults vain,
Matter to me of Glory, whom their hate
Illustrates, when they see all Regal Power
Given me to quell their pride, and in event 

Know whether I be dextrose to subdue
Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven.



So spake the Son, but Satan with his Powers
Far was advanced on winged speed, an Host
Innumerable as the Stars of Night,
Or Stars of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun
Impearls on every leaf and every floor. 
Regions they passed, the mighty Regencies
Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones
In their triple Degrees, Regions to which
All thy Dominion, Adam, is no more
Then what this Garden is to all the Earth,
And all the Sea, from one entire globose
Stretched into Longitude; which having passed
At length into the limits of the North
They came, and Satan to his Royal seat
High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount
Raised on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towers
From Diamond Quarries hewn, and Rocks of Gold,
The Palace of great Lucifer, (so call
That Structure in the Dialect of men
Interpreted) which not long after, he
Affecting all equality with God,
In imitation of that Mount whereon

Messiah was declared in sight of Heaven,
The Mountain of the Congregation called;
For thither he assembled all his Train,
Pretending so commanded to consult
About the great reception of their King,
Thither to come, and with calumnious Art
Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears.



Thrones, Dominations, Princedomes, Virtues,  Powers,
If these magnificant Titles yet remain 

Not merely titular, since by Decree
Another now hath to himself engrossed
All Power, and us eclipsed under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here,
This only to consult how we may best
With what may be devised of honours new
Receive him coming to receive from us
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile,
Too much to one, but double how endured,
To one and to his image now proclaimed?
But what if better counsels might erect
Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke?
Will ye submit your necks, and choose to bend
The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust
To know ye right, or if ye know your selves
Natives and Sons of Heaven possessed before
By none, and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free; for Orders and Degrees
Jar not with liberty, but well consist.
Who can in reason then or right assume
Monarchy over such as live by right
His equals, if in power and splendour less,
In freedom equal? or can introduce
Law and Edict on us, who without law
Err not, much less for this to be our Lord,
And look for adoration to the abuse
Of those Imperial Titles which assert
Our being ordained to govern, not to serve?



Thus far his bold discourse without control
Had audience, when among the Seraphim

Abdiel, then whom none with more zeal adored
The Deity, and divine commands obeyed, 

Stood up, and in a flame of zeal severe
The current of his fury thus opposed.



O argument blasphemous, false and proud!
Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven
Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate
In place thy self so high above thy Peers.
Can thou with impious obloquy condemn
The just Decree of God, pronounced and sworn,
That to his only Son by right endued
With Regal Sceptre, every Soul in Heaven
Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due
Confess him rightful King? unjust thou say
Flatly unjust, to bind with Laws the free,
And equal over equals to let Reign,
One over all with unsucceeded power.
Shalt thou give Law to God, shalt thou dispute
With him the points of liberty, who made
Thee what thou art, and formed the Powers of Heaven
Such as he pleased, and circumscribed their being?
Yet by experience taught we know how good,
And of our good, and of our dignity
How provident he is, how far from thought
To make us less, bent rather to exalt
Our happy state under one Head more near
United. But to grant it thee unjust,
That equal over equals Monarch Reign:
Thy self though great and glorious does thou count,
Or all Angelic Nature joint in one,
Equal to him begotten Son, by whom
As by his Word the mighty Father made
All things, even thee, and all the Spirits of Heaven
By him created in their bright degrees,
Crowned them with Glory, and to their Glory named 

Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscured,
But more illustrious made, since he the Head
One of our number thus reduced becomes,
His Laws our Laws, all honour to him done
Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage,
And tempt not these;  but hasten to appease
Th'incensed Father, and the incensed Son,
While Pardon may be found in time besought.



So spake the fervent Angel, but his zeal
None seconded, as out of season judged,
Or singular and rash, whereat rejoiced
the apostate, and more haughty thus replied.

 That we were formed then say thou?
and the work
Of secondary hands, by task transferred
From Father to his Son? strange point and new!
Doctrine which we would know whence learnt: who saw
When this creation was? remember thou
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now;
Know none before us, self-begot, self-raised
By our own quickening power, when fatal course
Had circled his full Orb, the birth mature
Of this our native Heaven, Ethereal Sons.
Our puissance is our own, our own right hand
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try
Who is our equal: then thou shalt behold
Whether by supplication we intend
Address, and to begirt the almighty Throne
Beseeching or besieging. This report,
These tidings carry to the anointed King;
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight. 




He said, and as the sound of waters deep
Hoarse murmur echoed to his words applause
Through the infinite Host, nor less for that
The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone
Encompassed round with foes, thus answered bold.



O alienate from God, O spirit accursed,
Forsak'n of all good; I see thy fall
Determined, and thy hapless crew involved
In this perfidious fraud, contagion spread
Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth
No more be troubled how to quit the yoke
Of Gods Messiah; those indulgent Laws
Will not be now Vouchsafed, other Decrees
Against thee are gon forth without recall;
That Golden Sceptre which thou did reject
Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and break
Thy disobedience. Well thou did advise,
Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly
These wicked Tents devoted, least the wrath
Impending, raging into sudden flame
Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel
His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire.
Then who created thee lamenting learn,
When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.



So spake the Seraph Abdiel faithful found,
Among the faithless, faithful only he;
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
unshaken, unseduc'd, unterrifi'd
His Loyalty he kept, his Love, his Zeal;
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind
Though single. From amidst them forth he passed, 

Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustained
Superior, nor of violence feared aught;
And with retorted scorn his back he turned
On those proud Towers to swift destruction doomed.
The End of the Fifth Book.

