 recalled
His Ministers of vengeance and pursuit
Back to the Gates of Heaven: the Sulphurous Hail
Shot after us in storm, overblown hath laid
The fiery Surge, that from the Precipice
Of Heaven received us falling, and the Thunder,
Winged with red Lightning and impetuous rage,
Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now
To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep.
Let us not slip the occasion, whether scorn,
Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe.
See thou yon dreary Plain, forlorn and wilde,
The seat of desolation, void of light,
Save what the glimmering of these livid flames
Casts pale and dreadful?  Thither let us tend

From off the tossing of these fiery waves,
There rest, if any rest can harbour there,
And reassembling our afflicted Powers,
Consult how we may henceforth most offend
Our Enemy, our own loss how repair,
How overcome this dire Calamity,
What reinforcement we may gain from Hope,
If not what resolution from despair.





Thus Satan to his nearest Mate
With Head up-lift above the wave, and Eyes
That sparkling blazed, his other Parts besides
Prone on the Flood, extended long and large
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge
As whom the Fables name of monstrous size,

Titanian, or Earth-born, that warred on Jove,

Briareos or Typhon, whom the Den
By ancient Tarsus held, or that Sea-beast

Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugest that swim the Ocean stream:
Him happily slumbering on the Norway foam
The Pilot of some small night-foundered Skiff,
Deeming some Island, oft, as Sea-men tell,
With fixed Anchor in his scaly rind
Moors by his side under the Lee, while Night
Invests the Sea, and wished Morn delays:
So stretched out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay
Chained on the burning Lake, nor ever thence
Had risen or heaved his head, but that the will
And high permission of all-ruling Heaven
Left him at large to his own dark designs,
That with reiterated crimes he might
Heap on himself damnation, while he sought
Evil to others, and enraged might see
How all his malice served but to bring forth

Infinite goodness, grace and mercy shown
On Man by him seduced, but on himself
Treble confusion, wrath and vengeance poured.
Forthwith upright he rears from off the Pool
His mighty Stature; on each hand the flames
Driven backward slope their pointing spires, and rolled
In billows, leave in the midst a horrid Vale.
Then with expanded wings he steers his flight
Aloft, incumbent on the dusky Air
That felt unusual weight, till on dry Land
He lights, if it were Land that ever burned
With solid, as the Lake with liquid fire;
And such appeared in hue, as when the force
Of subterranean wind transports a Hill
Torn from Pelorus, or the shattered side
Of thundering Aetna, whose combustible
And fuelled entrails thence conceiving Fire,
Sublimed with Mineral fury, aid the Winds,
And leave a singed bottom all involved
With stench and smoke: Such resting found the sole
Of unblessed feet.  Him followed his next Mate,
Both glorying to have escaped the Stygian flood
As Gods, and by their own recovered strength,
Not by the sufferance of supernal Power.





Is this the Region, this the Soil, the Clime,
Said then the lost Arch-Angel, this the seat
That we must change for Heaven, this mournful gloom
For that celestial light?  Be it so, since he
Who now is Sovran can dispose and bid
What shall be right: fardest from him is best
Whom reason hath equalled, force hath made supreme
Above his equals.  Farewell happy Fields
Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrors, hail
Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell

Receive thy new Possessor: One who brings
A mind not to be changed by Place or Time.
The mind is its own place, and in it self
Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.
What matter where, if I be still the same,
And what I should be, all but less then he
Whom Thunder hath made greater? Here at least
We shall be free; the Almighty hath not built
Here for his envy, will not drive us hence:
Here we may reign secure, and in my choice
To reign is worth ambition though in Hell:
Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heaven.
But wherefore let we then our faithful friends,
The associates and copartners of our loss
Lye thus astonished on the oblivious Pool,
And call them not to share with us their part
In this unhappy Mansion, or once more
With rallied Arms to try what may be yet
Regained in Heaven, or what more lost in Hell?





So Satan spake, and him Beelzebub

Thus answered.  Leader of those
Armies bright,
Which but the Omnipotent none could have foiled,
If once they hear that voice, their liveliest pledge
Of hope in fears and dangers, heard so oft
In worst extremes, and on the perilous edge
Of battle when it raged, in all assaults
Their surest signal, they will soon resume
New courage and revive, though now they lye
Grovelling and prostrate on yon Lake of Fire,
As we meanwhile, astounded and amazed,
No wonder, fallen such a pernicious height.





He scarce had ceased when the superior Fiend
Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield
Ethereal temper, massy, large and round,

Behind him cast; the broad circumference
Hung on his shoulders like the Moon, whose Orb
Through Optic Glass the Tuscan Artist views
At Evening from the top of Fesole,
Or in Valdarno, to descry new Lands,
Rivers or Mountains in her spotty Globe.
His Spear, to equal which the tallest Pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the Mast
Of some great Ammiral, were but a wand,
He walked with to support uneasy steps
Over the burning Marle, not like those steps
On Heavens Azure, and the torrid Clime
Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with Fire;
Nathless he so endured, till on the Beach
Of that inflamed Sea, he stood and called
His Legions, Angel Forms, who lay entranced
Thick as Autumnal Leaves that strew the Brooks
In Vallombrosa, where the Etrurian shades
High overarched imbowr; or scattered sedge
Afloat, when with fierce Winds Orion armed
Hath vexed the Red-Sea Coast, whose waves overthrew

Busirus and his Memphian Chivalry,
While with perfidious hatred they pursued
The Sojourners of Goshen, who beheld
From the safe shore their floating Carcasses
And broken Chariot Wheels, so thick bestrown
Abject and lost lay these, covering the Flood,
Under amazement of their hideous change.
He called so loud, that all the hollow Deep
Of Hell resounded.  Princes,
Potentates,
Warriors, the Flower of Heaven, once yours, now lost,
If such astonishment as this can seize
Eternal spirits; or have ye chosen this place
After the toil of Battle to repose

Your wearied virtue, for the ease you find
To slumber here, as in the Vales of Heaven?
Or in this abject posture have ye sworn
To adore the Conqueror?  who now beholds
Cherub and Seraph rolling in the Flood
With scattered Arms and Ensigns, till anon
His swift pursuers from Heaven Gates discern
The advantage, and descending tread us down
Thus drooping, or with linked Thunderbolts
Transfix us to the bottom of this Gulf.
Awake, arise, or be for ever fallen.





They heard, and were abashed, and up they sprung
Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch
On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread,
Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake.
Nor did they not perceive the evil plight
In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel;
Yet to their Generals Voice they soon obeyed
Innumerable.  As when the potent Rod
Of Amrams Son in Egypt evil day
Waved round the Coast, up called a pitchy cloud
Of Locusts, warping on the Eastern Wind,
That ore the Realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like Night, and darkened all the Land of Nile:
So numberless were those bad Angels seen
Hovering on wing under the Cope of Hell
Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding Fires;
Till, as a signal given, the uplifted Spear
Of their great Sultan waving to direct
Their course, in even balance down they light
On the firm brimstone, and fill all the Plain;
A multitude, like which the populous North
Poured never from her frozen loins, to pass

Rhene or the Danaw, when her barbarous Sons

Came like a Deluge on the South, and spread
Beneath Gibralter to the Lybian sands.
Forthwith from every Squadron and each Band
The Heads and Leaders thither has where stood
Their great Commander; Godlike shapes and forms
Excelling human, Princely Dignities,
And Powers that erst in Heaven sat on Thrones;
Though of their Names in heavenly Records now
Be no memorial blotted out and rased
By their Rebellion, from the Books of Life.
Nor had they yet among the Sons of Eve

Got them new Names, till wandering ore the Earth,
Through Gods high sufferance for the trial of man,
By falsities and lies the greatest part
Of Mankind they corrupted to forsake
God their Creator, and the invisible
Glory of him that made them, to transform
Oft to the Image of a Brute, adorned
With gay Religions full of Pomp and Gold,
And Devils to adore for Deities:
Then were they known to men by various Names,
And various Idols through the Heathen World.
Say, Muse, the Names then known, who first, who last,
Roused from the slumber, on that fiery Couch,
At their great Emperors call, as next in worth
Came singly where he st