
            Paradise Lost. Book I.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            This first Book proposes, first in brief, the whole Subject, 
Mans disobedience, and the loss thereupon of Paradise wherein  he
was placed: Then touches the prime cause of his fall,  the
Serpent, or rather Satan in the Serpent; who revolting from 
God, and drawing to his side many Legions of Angels, was by the  command
of God driven out of Heaven with all his Crew into the  great Deep.
 Which action past over, the Poem hastes into the  midst of things,
presenting Satan
 with his Angels now  fallen into Hell,
described here, not in the Center  (for Heyven and Earth
may be supposed as yet not made,  certainly not yet accursed) but in
a place of utter darkness,  fittest called Chaos: Here Satan
with his Angels  lying on \the burning Lake, thunder-struck and astonished,
after a certain  space recovers, as from confusion, calls up him who
next in Order  and Dignity lay by him; they confer of their miserable
fall. 
Satan awakens all his Legions, who  lay till then
in the same manner confounded; They rise, their Numbers,  array of
Battle, their chief Leaders named, according to the Idols  known afterwards
in Canaan and the Countries adjoining. To  these Satandirects
his Speech, comforts them with hope yet of  regaining Heaven, but tells
them lastly of a new World and new  kind of Creature to be created,
according to an ancient Prophecy  or report in Heaven; for that
Angels were long before this  visible Creation, was the opinion of many
ancient Fathers.  
To find out the truth of this Prophecy, and what to determine 
thereon he refers to a full Council.  What his Associates thence  attempt.
Pandemonium the Palace of Satan rises, suddenly built
out of the Deep: The infernal Peers there sit in  Council.



OF Mans First Disobedience, and the Fruit
Of that Forbidden Tree, whose mortal taste
Brought Death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
Restore us, and regain the blissful Seat,
Sing Heavenly Muse, that on the secret top
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, did inspire
That Shepherd, who first taught the chosen Seed,
In the Beginning how the Heavens and Earth
Rose out of Chaos: Or if Zion Hill
Delight thee more, and Siloa's Brook that flowed
Fast by the Oracle of God; I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventurous Song,


That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above the Aonian Mount, while it pursues
Things undignified yet in Prose or Rhyme.
And chiefly Thou, some copies omit the  commaO
Spirit, that does prefer
Before all Temples the upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for Thou know; Thou from the first
Was present, and with mighty wings outspread
Dove-like sat brooding on the vast Abyss
And made it pregnant: What in me is dark
Illuminates, what is low raise and support;
That to the height of this great Argument
I may assert Eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to men.


Say first, for Heaven hides nothing from thy view
Nor the deep Tract of Hell, say first what cause
Moved our Grand Parents in that happy State,
Favoured of Heaven so highly, to fall off
From their Creator, and transgress his Will
For one restraint, Lords of the World besides?
Who first seduced them to that foul revolt?
The infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile
Stirred up with Envy and Revenge, deceived
The Mother of Mankind, what time his Pride
Had cast him out from Heaven, with all his Host
Of Rebel Angels, by whose aid aspiring
To set himself in Glory above his Peers,
He trusted to have equalled the most High,
If he opposed; and with ambitious aim
Against the Throne and Monarchy of God
Raised impious War in Heaven and Battle proud
With vain attempt.  Him the Almighty Power
Hurled headlong flaming from the Ethereal Sky
With hideous ruin and combustion down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell

In Adamantine Chains and penal Fire,
Who dared defy the Omnipotent to Arms.
Nine times the Space that measures Day and Night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery Gulf
Confounded though immortal: But his doom
Reserved him to more wrath; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him; round he throws his baleful eyes
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate:
At once as far as Angels ken he views
The dismal Situation waste and wilde,
A Dungeon horrible, on all sides round
As one great Furnace flamed, yet from those flames
No light, but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery Deluge, fed
With ever-burning Sulphur unconsumed:
Such place Eternal Justice had prepared
For those rebellious, here their some copies  print
their  Prison ordained
In utter darkness, and their portion set
As far removed from God and light of Heaven
As from the Center thrice to the utmost Pole.
O how unlike the place from whence they fell!
There the companions of his fall, overwhelmed
With Floods and Whirlwinds of tempestuous fire,
He soon discerns, and weltering by his side
One next himself in power, and next in crime,
Long after known in Palestine, and named

Beelzebub.  To whom the Arch-Enemy,


And thence in Heaven called Satan, with bold  words
Breaking the horrid silence thus began.





If thou be he; But O how fallen! how changed
From him, who in the happy Realms of Light
Clothed with transcendent brightness did out-shine
Myriads though bright: If he whom mutual league,
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope
And hazard in the Glorious Enterprise,
Joined with me once, now misery hath joined
In equal ruin: into what Pit thou see
From what height fallen, so much the stronger proved
He with his Thunder: and till then who knew
The force of those dire Arms?  yet not for those,
Nor what the Potent Victor in his rage
Can else inflict, do I repent or change,
Though changed in outward lustre; that fixed mind
And high disdain, from sense of injured merit,
That with the mightiest raised me to contend,
And to the fierce contention brought along
Innumerable force of Spirits armed
That dared dislike his reign, and me preferring,
His utmost power with adverse power opposed
In dubious Battle on the Plains of Heaven,
And shook his throne.  What though the field be lost?
All is not lost; the unconquerable Will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield:
And what is else not to be overcome?
That Glory never shall his wrath or might
Extort from me.  To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, and deify his power,
Who from the terror of this Arm so late
Doubted his Empire, that were low indeed,
That were an ignominy and shame beneath

This downfall; since by Fate the strength of Gods
And this Imperial substance cannot fail,
Since through experience of this great event
In Arms not worse, in foresight much advanced,
We may with more successful hope resolve
To wage by force or guile eternal War
Irreconcilable, to our grand Foe,
Who now triumphs, and in the excess of joy
Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heaven.





So spake the Apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but racked with deep despair:
And him thus answered soon his bold Comfier.





O Prince, O Chief of many Droned Powers,
That led the embattled Seraphim to War
Under thy conduct, and in dreadful deeds
Fearless, endangered Heavens perpetual King;
And put to proof his sigh Supremacy,
Whether upheld by strength, or Chance, or Fate,
Too well I see and rue the dire event,
That with sad overthrow and foul defeat
Hath lost us Heaven, and all this mighty Host
In horrible destruction laid thus low,
As far as Gods and Heavenly Essences
Can perish: for the mind and spirit remains
Invincible, and vigour soon returns,
Though all our Glory extinct, and happy state
Here swallowed up in endless misery.
But what if he our Conqueror, (whom I now
Of force believe Almighty, since no less
Then such could have overpowerd such force as ours)
Have left us this our spirit and strength entire
Strongly to suffer and support our pains,
That we may so suffice his vengeful ire,
Or do him mightier service as his thralls


By right of War, what ever his business be
Here in the heart of Hell to work in Fire,
Or do his Errands in the gloomy Deep;
What can it then avail though yet we feel
Strength undiminished, or eternal being
To undergo eternal punishment?

 Where to with speedy words the
Arch-fiend replied.





Fallen Cherub, to be weak is miserable
Doing or Suffering: but of this be sure,
To do ought good never will be our task,
But ever to do ill our sole delight,
As being the contrary to his high will
Whom we resist.  If then his Providence
Out of our evil seek to bring forth good,
Our labour must be to pervert that end,
And out of good still to find means of evil;
Which oft times may succeed, so as perhaps 
Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb
His inmost counsels from their destined aim.
But see the angry Victor hath