o shine, yet scarce to contribute
Each Orb a glimpse of Light, conveyed so far
Down to this habitable, which returns
Light back to them, is obvious to dispute.
But whether thus these things, or whether not,
Whether the Sun predominant in Heaven
Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun
He from the East his flaming rode begin,
Or She from West her silent course advance
With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps
On her soft Axle, while she paces Even,
And bears thee soft with the smooth Air along,
Solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid,
Leave them to God above, him serve and fear;
Of other Creatures, as him pleases best,
Wherever placed, let him dispose: joy thou
In what he gives to thee, this Paradise

And thy fair Eve; Heaven is for thee too high
To know what passes there; be lowly wise:.
Think only what concerns thee and thy being;
Dream not of other Worlds, what Creatures there
Live, in what state, condition or degree,
Contented that thus far hath been revealed
Not of Earth only but of highest Heaven.





To whom thus Adam cleared of doubt, replied.

 How fully has thou satisfied me,
pure
Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene,
And freed from intricacies, taught to live,
The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts
To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
And not molest us, unless we our selves
Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain.
But apt the Mind or Fancy is to roave
Unchecked, and of her roving is no end;
Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn,
That not to know at large of things remote
From use, obscure and subtle, but to know
That which before us lies in daily life,
Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume,
Or emptiness, or fond impertinence,
And renders us in things that most concern
Unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek.
Therefore from this high pitch let us descend
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand
Useful, whence happily mention may arise
Of something not unseasonable to ask
By sufferance, and thy wonted favour deigned.
Thee I have heard relating what was don
Ere my remembrance: now hear me relate
My Story, which perhaps thou has not heard;
And Day is yet not spent; till then thou see
How subtly to detain thee I devise,
Inviting thee to hear while I relate,
Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply:
For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven,
And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear
Then Fruits of Palm-tree pleasantest to thirst

And hunger both, from labour, at the hour
Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill,
Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine
Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety.

 To whom thus Raphael
answered heavenly meek.



Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men,
Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee
Abundantly his gifts hath also poured
Inward and outward both, his image fair:
Speaking or mute all comeliness and grace
Attends thee, and each word, each motion forms,
Nor less think wee in Heaven of thee on Earth
Then of our fellow servant, and inquire
Gladly into the ways of God with Man:
For God we see hath honoured thee, and set
On Man his Equal Love: say therefore on;
For I that Day was absent, as befell,
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure,
Far on excursion toward the Gates of Hell;
Squared in full Legion (such command we had)
To see that none thence issued forth a spy,
Or enemy, while God was in his work,
Least he incensed at such eruption bold,
Destruction with Creation might have mixed.
Not that they dared without his leave attempt,
But us he sends upon his high behests
For state, as Soverign King, and to enure
Our prompt obedience.  Fast we found, fast shut
The dismal Gates, and barricaded strong;
But long ere our approaching heard within
Noise, other then the sound of Dance or Song,
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage.
Glad we returned up to the coasts of Light
Ere Sabbath Evening: so we had in charge.

But thy relation now; for I attend,
Pleased with thy words no less then thou with mine.



So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire.

 For Man to tell how human Life began
Is hard; for who himself beginning knew?
Desire with thee still longer to converse
Induced me.  As new waked from soundest sleep
Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid
In Balmy Sweat, which with his Beams the Sun
Soon dried, and on the reeking moisture fed.
Strait toward Heaven my wondering Eyes I turned,
And gazed a while the ample Sky, till raised
By quick instinctive motion up I sprung,
As thitherward endeavouring, and upright
Stood on my feet; about me round I saw
Hill, Dale, and shady Woods, and sunny Plains,
And liquid Lapse of murmuring Streams; by these,
Creatures that livd, and moved, and walked, or flew,
Birds on the branches warbling; all things smiled,
With fragrance and with joy my heart overflowed.
My self I then perused, and Limb by Limb
Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran
With supple joints, and lively vigour led:
But who I was, or where, or from what cause,
Knew not; to speak I tried, and forthwith spake
My Tongue obeyed and readily could name
What ever I saw.  Thou Sun, said I, fair Light,
And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay,
Ye Hills and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plains,
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell,
Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here?
Not of my self; by some great Maker then,
In goodness and in power pr??eminent;
Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,

From whom I have that thus I move and live,
And feel that I am happier then I know.
While thus I called, and strayed I knew not whither,
From where I first drew Air, and first beheld
This happy Light, when answer none returned,
On a green shady Bank profuse of Flours
Pensive I sate me down; there gentle sleep
First found me, and with soft oppression seized
My drowsed sense, untroubled, though I thought
I then was passing to my former state
Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve:
When suddenly stood at my Head a dream,
Whose inward apparition gently moved
My fancy to believe I yet had being,
And lived: One came, methought, of shape Divine,
And said,  thy Mansion wants thee,
Adam, rise,
First Man, of Men innumerable ordained
First Father, called by thee I come thy Guide
To the Garden of bliss, thy seat prepared.

 So saying, by the hand he took me
raised,
And over Fields and Waters, as in Air
Smooth sliding without step, last led me up
A woody Mountain; whose high top was plain,
A Circuit wide, enclosed, with goodliest Trees
Planted, with Walks, and Bowers, that what I saw
Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemed.  Each Tree
Load'n with fairest Fruit that hung to the Eye
Tempting, stirred in me sudden appetite
To pluck and eat; whereat I waked, and found
Before mine Eyes all real, as the dream
Had lively shadowed: Here had new begun
My wandering, had not he who was my Guide
Up hither, from among the Trees appeared
Presence Divine.  Rejoicing, but with awe

In adoration at his feet I fell
Submiss: he reared me, and  Whom thou
soughtst I am,

 Said mildly,
 Author of all this thou see
Above, or round about thee or bene