
            Paradise Lost. Book III.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            God sitting on his Throne sees Satan flying towards this
world,  then newly created; shows him to the Son who sat at his right 
hand; foretells the success of Satan in perverting mankind; 
clears his own Justice and Wisdom from all imputation, having  created
Man free and able enough to have withstood his  Templa; yet
declares his purpose of grace towards him, in  regard he fell not of his
own malice; as did Satan, but by him  seduced.  The Son of God
renders praises to his Father for the  manifestation of his gracious purpose
towards Man; but God  again declares, that Grace cannot be extended
towards Man without  the satisfaction of divine Justice; Man hath
offended the majesty  of God by aspiring to God-head, and therefore
with all his  Progeny devoted to death must dye, unless some one can be
found  sufficient to answer for his offence, and undergo his Punishment.
  The Son of God freely offers himself a Ransom for Man: the 
 Father accepts him, ordains his incarnation,  pronounces
his exaltation above all Names in Heaven and  Earth; commands all the
Angels to adore him; they obey, and  hymning to their Harps in full
Quire, celebrate the Father and the  Son.  Mean while  Satan
alights upon the bare Convex of  this Worlds outermost Orb; where
wandering he first finds a  place since called The Lymbo of Vanity; what
persons and things  fly up thither; thence comes to the Gate of Heaven,
described  ascending by stairs, and the waters above the Firmament
 that flow about it: His passage thence to the Orb of the Sun; he  finds
there Uriel the Regient of that Orb, but first changes 
himself into the shape of a meaner Angel; and pretending a  zealous
desire to behold the new Creation and Man whom God had  placed here,
enquires of him the place of his habitation, and is  directed; alights
first on Mount
Niphates.


HAil holy Light, offspring of Heaven first-born,
Or of the Eternal Coeternal beam
May I express thee unblamed? since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from Eternity, dwelt then in thee,
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or hear thou rather pure Ethereal stream,
Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun,
Before the Heavens thou were, and at the voice
Of God, as with a Mantle did invest
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing,
Escaped the Stygian Pool, though long detained 

In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne
With other notes then to the Orphean Lyre
I sung of Chaos and Eternal Night,
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to re-ascend,
Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy soverign vital Lamp; but thou
Revisits not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop serene hath quenched their Orbs,
Or dim suffusion veiled.  Yet not the more
Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt
Clear Spring, or shady Grove, or Sunny Hill,
Smite with the love of sacred Song; but chief
Thee Zion and the flowery Brooks beneath
That wash thy hallowed feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit: nor sometimes forget
Those other two equalled with me in Fate,
So were I equalled with them in renown,
Blind Thamyris and blind M??onides,
And Tiresias and Phineus Prophets old.
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move
Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful Bird
Sings darkling, and in shadiest Covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal Note. Thus with the Year
Seasons return, but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of Even or Morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or Summers Rose,
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine;
But cloud in stead, and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off, and for the Book of knowledge fair
Presented with a Universal blanc 

Of Natures works to me expunged and rased,
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou Celestial light
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate, there plant eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.


Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure Empyrean where he sits
High Throned above all height, bent down his eye,
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as Stars, and from his sight received
Beatitude past utterance; on his right
The radiant image of his Glory sat,
His only Son; On Earth he first beheld
Our two first Parents, yet the only two
Of mankind, in the happy Garden placed,
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivaled love
In blissful solitude; he then surveyed
Hell and the Gulf between, and Satan there
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night
In the dun Air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet
On the bare outside of this World, that seemed
Firm land bosomed without Firmament,
Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future he beholds,
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake.



Only begotten Son, see thou what rage
Transports our adversary, whom no bounds
Prescribed, no bars of Hell, nor all the chains 

Heaped on him there, nor yet the main Abyss
Wide interrupt can hold; so bent he seems
On desperate revenge, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head.  And now
Through all restraint broke loose he wings his way
Not far off Heaven, in the Precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created World,
And Man there placed, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or worse,
By some false guile pervert; and shall pervert
For man will harken to his glozing lies,
And easily transgress the sole Command,
Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall,
He and his faithless Progeny: whose fault?
Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of me
All he could have; I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the Ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood and them who failed;
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant Faith or Love,
Where only what they needs must do, appeared,
Not what they would? what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When Will and Reason (Reason also is choice)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoiled,
Made passive both, had served necessity,
Not me.  They therefore as to right belongs,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their maker, or their making, or their Fate,
As if predestination over-ruled
Their will, disposed by absolute Decree
Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed 


Their own revolt, not I: if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of Fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, Authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge and what they choose; for so
I formed them free, and free they must remain,
Till they enthral themselves: I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high Decree
Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordained
Their freedom, they themselves ordained their fall.
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Self-tempted, self-depraved: Man falls deceived
By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none: in Mercy and Justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel,
But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine.



Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance filled
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffused:
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious, in him all his Father shone
Substantially expressed, and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeared,
Love without end, and without measure Grace,
Which uttering thus he to his Father spake.



O Father, gracious was that word which closed
Thy soverign sentence, that Man should find grace;
For which both Heaven and Earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of Hymns and sacred Songs, where to thy Throne
Encompassed shall resound thee ever blessed.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man 

Thy creature late so loved, thy youngest Son
Fall circumvente