ntain, or fresh shade
Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise.
Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still
To give us only good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil or concealed,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.



So prayed they innocent, and to their thoughts
Firm peace recovered soon and wonted calm.
On to their mornings rural work they haste
Among sweet dews and flours; where any row
Of Fruit-trees overwoodie reached too far
Their pampered boughs, and needed hands to check
Fruitless embraces: or they led the Vine
To wed her Elm; she spoused about him twines
Her marriageable arms, and with her brings
Her dour the adopted Clusters, to adorn
His barren leaves. Them thus employed beheld
With pity Heavens high King, and to him called

Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deigned
To travel with Tobias, and secured
His marriage with the seven times wedded Maid.




Raphael, said he, thou hear what stir on Earth

Satan from Hell escaped through the darksome Gulf
Hath raised in Paradise, and how disturbed
This night the human pair, how he designs
In them at once to ruin all mankind.
Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend
Converse with Adam, in what Bower or shade
Thou find him from the heat of Noon retired,
To respite his day-labour with repast,
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,
As may advise him of his happy state, 

Happiness in his power left free to will,
Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,
Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware
He swerve not too secure: tell him withal
His danger, and from whom, what enemy
Late fallen himself from Heaven, is plotting now
The fall of others from like state of bliss;
By violence, no, for that shall be withstood,
But by deceit and lies; this let him know,
Least wilfully transgressing he pretend
Surprise, unadmonisht, unforewarnd.



So spake the Eternal Father, and fulfilled
All Justice: nor delayed the winged Saint
After his charge received, but from among
Thousand Celestial Ardors, where he stood
Veiled with his gorgeous wings, up springing light
Flew through the midst of Heaven; the Angelic Quires
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
Through all the Empyreal road; till at the Gate
Of Heaven arrived, the gate self-opened wide
On golden Hinges turning, as by work
Divine the soverign Architect had framed.
From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,
Star interposed, however small he sees,
Not unconfirmed to the other shining Globes,
Earth and the Garden of God, with Cedars crowned
Above all Hills. As when by night the Glass
Of Galileo, less assured, observes
Imagined Lands and Regions in the Moon:
Or Pilot from amidst the Cyclades


Delos or Samos first appearing kens
A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing 

Now on the polar winds, then with quick Fann
Winnows the buxom Air;  till within soar
Of Towering Eagles, to all the Fowls he seems
A Ph??nix, gazed by all, as that sole 
Bird
When to enshrine his relics in the Sun's
Bright Temple, to ??gyptian Theb's he flies.
At once on the Eastern cliff of Paradise

He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A Seraph winged; six wings he wore, to shade
His lineaments Divine; the pair that clad
Each shoulder broad, came mantling o'er his breast
With regal Ornament; the middle pair
Girt like a Starry Zone his waste, and round
Skirted his loins and thighs with downy Gold
And colours dipped in Heaven; the third his feet
Shadowed from either heel with feathered mail
sky-tinctured grain. Like Maia's son he stood,
And shook his Plumes, that Heavenly fragrance filled
The circuit wide. Strait knew him all the Bands
Of Angels under watch; and to his state,
And to his message high in honour rise;
For on some message high they guest him bound.
The glittering Tents he passed, and now is come
Into the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrh,
And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nerd, and Balm;
A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature here
Wantoned as in her prime, and plaid at will
Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet,
Wilde above Rule or Art; enormous bliss.
Him through the spicy Forest onward come

Adam discerned, as in the door he sat
Of his cool Bower, while now the mounted Sun
Shot down direct his fervid Rays to warm
Earths inmost womb, more warmth then Adam needs; 

And Eve within, due at her hour prepared
For dinner savoury fruits, of taste to please
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst
Of nectarous draughts between, from milky stream,
Berry or Grape: to whom thus Adam called.



Haste hither Eve, and worth thy sight behold
Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape
Comes this way moving; seems another Morn
Risen on mid-noon;  some great behest from Heaven
To us perhaps he brings, and will voutchsafe
This day to be our Guest. But go with speed,
And what thy stores contain, bring forth and pour
Abundance, fit to honour and receive
Our Heavenly stranger; well we may afford
Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow
From large bestowed, where Nature multiplies
Her fertile growth, and by disburd'ning grows
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.



To whom thus Eve. 
Adam, earths  hallowed mould
Of God inspired, small store will serve, where store,
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;
Save what by frugal storing firmness gains
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:
But I will haste and from each bough and break,
Each Plant and juiciest Gourd will pluck such choice
To entertain our Angel guest, as he
Beholding shall confess that here on Earth
God hath dispensed his bounties as in Heaven.



So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent
What choice to choose for delicacy best,
What order, so contrived as not to mix
Tastes, not well joined, inelegant, but bring
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change, 

Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk
Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yields
In India East or West, or middle shore
In Pontus or the Punic Coast, or where

Alcinous reigned, fruit of all kinds, in coat,
Rough, or smooth rind, or bearded husk, or shell
She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the Grape
She crushes, inoffensive moust, and meads
From many a berry, and from sweet kernels pressed
She tempers dulcet creams, nor these to hold
Wants her fit vessels pure, then strews the ground
With Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum'd.
Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meet
His god-like Guest, walks forth, without more train
Accompanied then with his own complete
Perfections, in himself was all his state,
More solemn then the tedious pomp that waits
On Princes, when their rich Retinue long
Of Horses led, and Grooms besmeared with Gold
Dazzles the crowd, and sets them all agape.
Nearer his presence Adam though not old,
Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,
As to a superior Nature, bowing low,


Thus said.  Native of Heaven,
for other  place
None can then Heaven such glorious shape contain;
Since by descending from the Thrones above,
Those happy places thou has deigned a while
To want, and honour these, voutchsafe with us
Two only, who yet by soverign gift possess
This spacious ground, in yonder shady Bower
To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears
To sit and taste, till this meridian heat
Be over, and the Sun more cool decline. 




Whom thus the Angelic Virtue answered mild.


Adam, I therefore came, nor art thou such
Created, or such place has here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heaven
To visit thee; lead on then where thy Bower
Over-shades; for these mid-hours, till Evening rise
I have at will.  So to the Sylvan
Lodge
They came, that like Pomona's Arbour smiled
With flourets decked and fragrant smells; but Eve
Undeckt, save with her self more lovely fair
Then Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feigned
Of three that in Mount Ida naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven; no veil
She needed, Virtue-proof, no thought infirm
Altered her cheek. On whom the Angel Hail

Bestowed, the holy salutation used
Long after to blessed Marie, second Eve.



Hail Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful Womb
Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons
Then with these various fruits the Trees of God
Have heaped this Table.  Raised of
grassy turf
Their Table was, and mossy seats had round,
And on her ample Square from side to side
All Autumn piled, though Spring and Autumn
here
Danced hand in hand. A while discourse they hold;
No fear lest Dinner cool; when thus began
Our Author.  Heavenly stranger,
please to taste
These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom
All perfect good unmeasured out, descends,
To us for food and for delight hath cause
The Earth to yield; unsavoury food perhaps
To spiritual Natures; only this I know,
That one Celestial Father gives to all. 





To whom the Angel.  Therefore
 what he gives
(Whose praise be ever sung) to man in part
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found
No ungrateful food; and food alike those pure
Intelligential substances require
As doth your Rational; and both contain
Within them every lower faculty
Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be sustained and fed; of Elements
The grosser feeds the purer, Earth the Sea,
Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those Fires
Ethereal, and as lowest first the Moon;
Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurged
Vapours not yet into her substance turned.
Nor doth the Moon no nourishment exhale
From her moist Continent to higher Orbs.
The Sun that light imparts to all, receives
From all his elemental recompense
In humid exhalations, and at Even
Sups with the Ocean: though in Heaven the Trees
Of life ambrosial fruit bear, and vines
Yield Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn
We brush mellifluous Dews, and find the ground
Covered with pearly grain: yet God hath here
Varied his bounty so with new delights,
As may