Vale on slime,
Huge Python, and his Power no less he seemed
Above the rest still to retain; they all
Him followed issuing forth to th'open Field,
Where all yet left of that revolted Rout
heaven fallen, in station stood or just array,
Sublime with expectation when to see
ln Triumph issuing forth their glorious Chief;
They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd
Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell,
And horrid sympathy; for what they saw,
They felt themselves now changing; down their arms,
Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as fast,
And the dire hiss renewed, and the dire form
Caught by Contagion, like in punishment,
As in their crime.  Thus was th'applause they meant,
Turned to exploding hiss, triumph to shame
Cast on themselves from their own mouths.  There stood
A Grove hard by, sprung up with this their change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Their penance, laden with Fruit like that
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve

Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining
For one forbidden Tree a multitude
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame;
Yet parcht with scalding thirst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain,

But on they rolled in heaps, and up the Trees
Climbing, sat thicker then the snaky locks
That curled Meg??ra: greedily they plucked
The fruit fair to sight, like that which grew
Near that bituminous Lake where Sodom flamed;
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
Deceived; they fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with gust, instead of Fruit
Showed bitter Ashes, which th'offended taste
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayed,
Hunger and thirst constraining, drugd as oft,
With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws
With soot and cinders filled; so oft they fell
Into the same illusion, not as Man
Whom they triumphed once lapsed.  Thus were they plagued
And worn with Famine, long and ceaseless hiss,
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed,
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo
This annual humbling certain numbered days,
To dash their pride, and joy for Man seduced.
However some tradition they dispersed
Among the Heathen of their purchase got,
And Fabled how the Serpent, whom they called

Ophion with Eurynome, the wide-
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule
Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driven
And Ops, ere yet Dictaelig;an Jove was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arrived, Sin there in power before,
Once actual, now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant; behind her Death

Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale Horse: to whom Sin thus began.



Second of Satan sprung, all conquering Death,

What think thou of our Empire now, though earned
With travail difficult, not better far
Then still at Hells dark threshold to have sate watch,
Unnamed, untreated, and thy self half starved?



Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answered soon.

 To me, who with eternal Famine
pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven,
There best, where most with ravine I may meet;
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this Maw, this vast unhide-bound Corps.



To whom th'incestuous Mother thus replied.
 Thou therefore on these Herbs, and
Fruits, and Flours
Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Foul,
No homely morsels, and whatever thing
The Sith of Time mowes down, devour unspar'd,
Till I in Man residing through the Race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect,
And season him thy last and sweetest prey.



This said, they both betook them several ways,
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for destruction to mature
Sooner or later; which the almighty seeing,
From his transcendent Seat the Saints among,
To those bright Orders uttered thus his voice.



See with what heat these Dogs of Hell  advance
To waste and havoc yonder World, which I
So fair and good created, and had still
Kept in that State, had not the folly of Man
Let in these wistful Furies, who impute
Folly to me, so doth the Prince of Hell
And his Adherents, that with so much ease
I suffer them to enter and possess
A place so heavenly, and conniving-seem
To gratify my scornful Enemies,

That laugh, as if transported with some fit
Of Passion, I to them had quited all,
At random yielded up to their misrule;
And know not that I called and drew them thither
My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth
Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath shed
On what was pure, till crammed and gorged, nigh burst
With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling
Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son,
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave
at  last
Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jaws.
Then Heaven and Earth renewed shall be made pure
To sanctity that shall receive no stain:
Till then the Curse pronounced on both precedes.



He ended, and the heavenly Audience loud
Sung Halleluia, as the sound of Seas,
Through multitude that sung: 
Just are thy  ways,
Righteous are thy Decrees on all thy Works;
Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son,
Destined restorer of Mankind, by whom
New Heaven and Earth shall to the Ages rise,
Or down from Heaven descend.  Such
was their song,
While the Creator calling forth by name
His mighty Angels gave them several charge,
As sorted best with present things.  The Sun
Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
As might affect the Earth with cold and heat
Scarce tolerable, and from the North to call
Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring
Solstitial summers heat.  To the blanc Moon
Her office they prescribed, to the other five
Their planetary motions and aspects
In Sextile, Square, 
and Trine, and                                  
                
Opposite,

Of noxious efficacy, and when to join
In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixed
Their influence malignant when to shower,
Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling,
Should prove tempestuous: To the Winds they set
Their corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, Air, and Shore, the Thunder when to roll
With terror through the dark Aerial Hall.
Some say he bid his Angels turn askance
The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more
From the Suns Axle; they with labour pushed
Oblique the Centres Globe: Some say the Sun
Was bid turn Reins from th'Equinoctial Rode
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the Seven

Atlantic Sisters, and the Spartan Twins
Up to the Tropic
Crab;  thence
down amain
By Leo and the Virgin and the Scales,
As deep as Capricorn, to bring in change
Of Seasons to each Clime; else had the Spring
Perpetual smiled on Earth with vernant Flours,
Equal in Days and Nights, except to those
Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day
Had unbenighted shone, while the low Sun
To recompense his distance, in their sight
Had rounded still theHorizon, and not  known
Or East or West, which had forbid the Snow
From cold Estotiland, and South as far
Beneath Magellan.  At that tasted Fruit
The Sun, as from Thyestean Banquet, turned
His course intended; else how had the World
Inhabited, though sunless, more then now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat?
These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced
Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast,

Vapour, and Mist, and Exhalation hot,
Corrupt and Pestilent: Now from the North
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore
Bursting their brazen Dungeon, armed with ice
And snow and hail and stormy gust and flaw,

Bores and C??cias and Argestes
loud
And Thrascias rend the Woods and Seas upturn;
With adverse blast upturns them from the South

Notus and Afer black with thundrous Clouds
From Serraliona; thwart of these as fierce
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent Winds

Eurus and Zephir with their lateral noise,

Sirocco, and Libecchio, Thus began
Outrage from lifeless things; but Discord first
Daughter of Sin, among th'irrational,
Death introduced through fierce antipathy:
Beast now with Beast began war, and Foul with Foul,
And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving,
Devoured each other; nor stood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him, or with countenance grim
Glared on him passing: these were from without
The growing miseries, which Adam saw
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within,
And in a troubled Sea of passion tossed,
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint.



O miserable of happy! is this the end
Of this new glorious World, and me so late
The Glory of that Glory, who now become
Accursed of blessed, hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my height
Of happiness: yet well, if here would end
The misery, I deserved it, and would bear
My own deservings; but this will not serve;


All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated curse.  O voice once heard
Delightfully, 
Increase and  multiply,

 Now death to hear! for what can I
increase
Or multiply, but curses on my head?
Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My Head,  Ill fare our
Ancestor impure,
For this we may thank Adam;

but his thanks
Shall be the execration; so besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me
Shall with a fierce reflux on me redound,
On me as on their natural center light
Heavy, though in their place.  O fleeting joys
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay
To mould me Man, did I solicit thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious Garden? as my Will
Concurred not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust,
Desirous to resign, and render back
All I received, unable to perform
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not.  To the loss of that,
Sufficient penalty, why has thou added
The sense of endless woes? inexplicable
Thy justice seems; yet to say truth, too late,
I thus contest; then should have been refused
Those terms whatever, when they were proposed:
Thou did accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil the conditions? and though God
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son
Prove disobedient, and reproved, retort,

Wherefore did thou beget me? I sought it not:
Would thou admit for his contempt of thee
That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,
But Natural necessity begot.
God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
To serve him, thy reward was of his grace,
Thy punishment then justly is at his Will.
Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair,
That dust I am, and shall to dust return:
O welcome hour whenever! why delays
His hand to execute what his Decree
Fixed on this day? why do I overlive,
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out
To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet
Mortality my sentence, and be Earth
Insensible, how glad would lay me down
As in my Mothers lap? there I should rest
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more
Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse
To me and to my offspring would torment me
With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, least all I cannot die,
Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man
Which God inspired, cannot together perish
With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave,
Or in some other dismal place who knows
But I shall die a living Death? O thought
Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath
Of Life that sinned; what dies but what had life
And sin? the Body properly hath neither.
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since humane reach no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrath also? be it, man is not so,


But mortal doomed.  How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end?
Can he make deathless Death? that were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held, as Argument
Of weakness, not of Power.  Will he, draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite
In punished man, to satisfy his rigour
Satisfied never; that were to extend
His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law,
By which all Causes else according still
To the reception of their matter act,
Not to th'extent of their own Sphere.  But say
That Death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
Bereaving sense, but endless misery
From this day onward, which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me, and so last
To perpetuity; Ay me, that fear
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
On my defenceless head; both Death and I
Am found Eternal, and incorporate bot