
            Paradise Lost. BOOK VIII.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            
Adam enquires concerning celestial Motions, is doubtfully
 answered, and exhorted to search rather things more worthy of 
knowledge: Adam assents, and still desirous to detain Raphael,
 relates to him what he remembered since his own Creation, his  placing
in Paradise, his talk with God  concerning solitude and
fit society, his first meeting and  Nuptials with Eve, his
discourse with the Angel thereupon; who  after admonitions repeated
departs.

THE Angel ended, and in Adams Ear
So Charming left his voice, that he a while
Thought him still speaking, still stood fixed to hear;
Then as new waked thus gratefully replied.

 What thanks sufficient, or what
recompense
Equal have I to render thee, Divine
Historian, who thus largely has allayed
The thirst I had of knowledge, and Vouchsafed

This friendly condescension to relate
Things else by me unsearchable, now heard
With wonder, but delight, and, as is due,
With glory attributed to the high
Creator; something yet of doubt remains,
Which only thy solution can resolve.
When I behold this goodly Frame, this World
Of Heaven and Earth consisting, and compute,
Their magnitudes, this Earth a spot, a grain,
An Atom, with the Firmament compared
And all her numbered Stars, that seem to roll
Spaces incomprehensible (for such
Their distance argues and their swift return
Diurnal) merely to officiate light
Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot,
One day and night; in all their vast survey
Useless besides, reasoning I oft admire,
How Nature wise and frugal could commit
Such disproportions, with superfluous hand
So many nobler Bodies to create,
Greater so manifold to this one use,
For aught appears, and on their Orbs impose
Such restless revolution day by day
Repeated, while the sedentary Earth,
That better might with far less compass move,
Served by more noble then her self, attains
Her end without least motion, and receives,
As Tribute such a sumless journey brought
Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light;
Speed, to describe whose swiftness Number fails. 


So spake our Sire, and by his countenance seemed
Entering on studious thoughts abstruse, which Eve

Perceiving where she sat retired in sight,
With lowliness Majestic from her seat,


And Grace that won who saw to wish her stay,
Rose, and went forth among her Fruits and Flours,
To visit how they prospered, bud and bloom,
Her Nursery; they at her coming sprung
And touched by her fair tendency gladlier grew.
Yet went she not, as not with such discourse
Delighted, or not capable her ear
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserved,

Adam relating, she sole Auditress;
Her Husband the Relater she preferred
Before the Angel, and of him to ask
Chose rather; he, she knew would intermix
Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
With conjugal Caresses, from his Lip
Not Words alone pleased her.  O when meet now
Such pairs, in Love and mutual Honour joined?
With Goddess-like demeanour forth she went;
Not unattended, for on her as Queen
A pomp of winning Graces waited still,
And from about her shot Darts of desire
Into all Eyes to wish her still in sight.
And Raphael now to Atom's doubt proposed
Benevolent and facile thus replied.



To ask or search I blame thee not, for Heaven
Is as the Book of God before thee set,
Wherein to read his wondrous Works, and learn
His Seasons, Hours, or Days, or Months, or Years:
This to attain, whether Heaven move or Earth,
Imports not, if thou reckon right, the rest
From Man or Angel the great Architect
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge
His secrets to be scanned by them who ought
Rather admire; or if they list to try
Conjecture, he his Fabric of the Heavens

Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move
His laughter at their quaint Opinions wide
Hereafter, when they come to model Heaven
And calculate the Stars, how they will wield
The mighty frame, how build, unbuild, contrive
To save appearances, how gird the Sphere
With Centres and Eccentric scribbled o'er,
Cycle and Epicycle, Orb in Orb:
Already by thy reasoning this I guess,
Who art to lead thy offspring, and suppose
That bodies bright and greater should not serve
The less not bright, nor Heaven such journeys run,
Earth sitting still, when she alone receives
The benefit: consider first, that Great
Or Bright infers not Excellence: the Earth
Though, in comparison of Heaven, so small,
Nor glistening, may of solid good contain
More plenty then the Sun that barren shines
Whose virtue on it self works no effect,
But in the fruitful Earth; there first received
His beams, unactive else, their vigour find.
Yet not to Earth are those bright Luminaries
Officious, but to thee Earths habitant.
And for the Heavens wide Circuit, let it speak
The Makers high magnificence, who built
So spacious, and his Line stretched out so far;
That Man may know he dwells not in his own;
An Edifice too large for him to fill,
Lodged in a small partition, and the rest
Ordained for uses to his Lord best known.
The swiftness of those Circles attribute
Though numberless, to his Omnipotence,
That to corporeal substances could add
Speed almost Spiritual; me thou think not slow,


Who since the Morning hour set out from Heaven
Where God resides, and ere mid-day arrived
In Eden, distance inexpressible
By Numbers that have name.  But this I urge,
Admitting Motion in the Heavens, to show
Invalid that which thee to doubt it moved;
Not that I so affirm, though so it seem
To thee who has thy dwelling here on Earth.
God to remove his ways from human sense,
Placed Heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight,
If it presume, might err in things too high,
And no advantage gain.  What if the Sun
Be Center to the World, and other Stars
By his attractive virtue and their own
Incited, dance about him various rounds?
Their wandering course now high, now low, then hid,
Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,
In six thou see, and what if seventh to these
The Planet Earth, so steadfast though she seem,
Insensibly three different Motions move?
Which else to several Spears thou must ascribe,
Moved contrary with thwart obliquities,
Or save the Sun his labour, and that swift
Nocturnal and Diurnal rhomb supposed,
Invisible else above all Stars, the Wheel
Of Day and Night; which needs not thy belief,
If Earth industrious of her self fetch Day
Travelling East, and with her part averse
From the Suns beam meet Night, her other part
Still luminous by his ray.  What if that light
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air,
To the terrestrial Moon be as a Star
Enlightening her by Day, as she by Night
This Earth? reciprocal, if Land be there,

Fields and Inhabitants: Her spots thou see
As Clouds, and Clouds may rain, and Rain produce
Fruits in her softened Soil, for some to eat
Allotted there; and other Suns perhaps
With their attendant Moons thou wilt descry
Communicating Male and Female Light,
Which two great Sexes animate the World,
Stored in each Orb perhaps with some that live.
For such vast room in Nature unpossessed
By living Soul, desert and desolate,
Only t