all the Charities
Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known.
Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets,
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs used.
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights
His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unhindered, 

Casual fruition, nor in Court Amours
Mixed Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal,
Or Serenate, which the starved Lover sings
To his proud fair, best quited with disdain.
These lulled by Nightingales embracing slept,
And on their naked limbs the flowery roof
Showered Roses, which the Morn repaired.  Sleep on
Blessed pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more.


Now had night measured with her shadow Cone
Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault,
And from their Ivory Port the Cherubim
Forth issuing at th'accustomd hour stood armed
To their night watches in warlike Parade,
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake.




Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the  South
With strictest watch; these other wheel the North,
Our circuit meets full West.   As
flame they part
Half wheeling to the Shield, half to the Spear.
From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he called
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge.
Ithuriel and Zephon, with winged speed
Search through this Garden, leave unsearched no nook,
But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge,
Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harm.
This Evening from the Sun's decline arrived
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escaped
The bars of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:
Such where ye find, seize fast, and hither bring. 



So saying, on he led his radiant Files,
Dazzling the Moon; these to the Bower direct
In search of whom they sought: him there they found
Squat like a Toad, close at the ear of Eve; 

Assaying by his Devilish art to reach
The Organs of her Fancy, and with them forge
Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams,
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint
The animal Spirits that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise
At least distempered, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires
Blown up with high conceits engendering pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his Spear
Touched lightly; for no falsehood can endure
Touch of Celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness: up he starts
Discovered and surprised.  As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous Powder, laid
Fit for the Tun some Magazine to store
Against a rumoured War, the Smutty grain
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the Air:
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stepped those two fair Angels half amazed
So sudden to behold the grisly King;
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon.



Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell
Come thou, escaped thy prison, and transformed,
Why sat thou like an enemy in wait
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?



Know ye not then said Satan, filled  with
scorn,

Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye dared not soar;
Not to know me argues your selves unknown,
The lowest of your throng; or if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?

To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn. 


Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminished brightness, to be known
As when thou stood in Heaven upright and pure;
That Glory then, when thou no more was good,
Departed from thee, and thou resembles now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.



So spake the Cherub, and his grave rebuke
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible: abashed the Devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovely, saw, and pined
His loss; but chiefly to find here observed
His lustre visibly impaired; yet seemed
Undaunted.  If I must contend,
 said he,

Best with the best, the Sender not the sent,
Or all at once; more glory will be won,
Or less be lost.  Thy fear,
 said Zephon  bold,
Will save us trial what the least can doe
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.



The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage;
But like a proud Steed reined, went haughty on,
Champing his iron curb: to strive or fly
He held it vain; awe from above had quelled
His heart, not else dismayed.  Now drew they nigh
The western Point, where those half-rounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joint
Awaiting next command.  To whom their Chief

Gabriel from the Front thus called aloud.



O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern

Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade, 

And with them comes a third of Regal port,
But faded splendour wan; who by his gate
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest;
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours. 



He scarce had ended, when those two approached
And brief related whom they brought, where found,
How busied, in what form and posture couched.


To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake.
 Why has thou, Satan broke
the bounds prescribed
To thy transgressions, and disturbed the charge
Of others, who approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
To question thy bold entrance on this place;
Employed it seems to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss? 



To whom thus Satan, with contemptuous brow.


Gabriel, thou had in Heaven the esteem of wise,
And such I held thee; but this question asked
Puts me in doubt.  Lives there who loves his pain?
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomed? Thou would thy self, no doubt,
And boldly venture to whatever place
Farthest from pain, where thou might hope to change
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;
To thee no reason; who know only good,
But evil has not tried: and wilt object
His will who bound us? let him surer barr
His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance: thus much what was asked.
The rest is true, they found me where they say;
But that implies not violence or harm.



Thus he in scorn.The warlike Angel moved,

Disdainfully half smiling thus replied.

O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise,
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison escaped,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicensed from his bounds in Hell prescribed;
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However, and to escape his punishment.
So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrath,
Which thou incurs by flying, meet thy flight
seven fold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provoked.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them
Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they
Less hardy to endure? courageous Chief,
The first in flight from pain, had thou alleged
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely had not come sole fugitive. 



To which the Fiend thus answered frowning stern.

Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel, well thou know I stood
Thy fiercest, when in Battle to thy aide
Thy blasting volleyed Thunder made all speed
And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear.
But still thy words at random, as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behoves
From hard assays and ill successes past
A faithful Leader, not to hazard all
Through ways of danger by himself untried.
I therefore, I alone first undertook 


To wing the desolate Abyss, and spy
This new created World, whereof in Hell
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on Earth, or in mid Air;
Though for possession put to try once more
What thou and thy gay Legions dare against;
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his Throne,
And practised distances to cringe, not fight.



To whom the warrior Angel, soon replied.

To say and strait unsay, pretending first
Wise to fly pain, professing next the Spy,
Argues no Leader but a liar traced,

Satan, and could thou faithful add?  O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head;
Was this your discipline and faith engaged,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegiance to the acknowldged Power supreme?
And thou sly hypocrite, who now would seem
Patron of liberty, who more then thou
Once fawned, and cringed, and servilly adored
Heavens awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope
To dispossess him, and thy self to reign?
But mark what I arreede thee now, avaunt;
Fly thither whence thou fled: if from this hour
Within these hallowed limits thou appear,
Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chained,
And Seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
The facile gates of hell too slightly barred. 



So threatened he, but Satan to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied. 




Then when I am thy captive talk of chains,
Proud limitarie Cherub, but ere then
Far heavier load thy self expect to feel
From my prevailing arm, though Heavens King
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers,
Used to the yoke, draw his triumphant wheels
In progress through the rode of Heaven Star-paved.



While thus he spake, the Angelic Squadron bright
Turned fiery red, sharpening in mooned horns
Their Phalanx, and began to hemm him round
With ported Spears, as thick as when a field
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind
Sways them; the careful Ploughmen doubting stands
Least on the threshing floor his hopeful sheaves
Prove chaff. On the other side Satan alarmed
Collecting all his might dilated stood,
Like Teneriff or Atlas unremoved:
His stature reached the Sky, and on his Crest
Sat horror Plumed; nor wanted in his grasp
What seemed both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise

In this commotion, but the Starry Cope
Of Heaven perhaps, or all the Elements
At least had gon to rack, disturbed and torn
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
the Eternal to prevent such horrid fray
Hung forth in Heaven his golden Scales, yet seen
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign,
Wherein all things created first he weight,
The pendulous round Earth with balanced Air
In counterpoised, now ponders all events,
Battles and Realms: in these he put two weights
The sequel each of parting and of fight; 


The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam;
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespoke the Fiend.




Satan, I know thy strength, and thou know  mine,
Neither our own but given; what folly then
To boast what Arms can doe, since thine no more
Then Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubled now
To trample thee as mire: for proof look up,
And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist.   The Fiend looked up
and knew
His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.
The End of the Fourth Book.

