ndures.



To whom the Virgin Majesty of Eve,
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets,
With sweet austeer composure thus replied,



Offspring of Heaven and Earth, and all Earths Lord,
That such an Enemy we have, who seeks
Our ruin, both by thee informed I learn,
And from the parting Angel over-heard
As in a shady nook I stood behind,
Just then returned at shut of Evening Flours.
But that thou should my firmness therefore doubt
To God or thee, because we have a foe
May tempt it, I expected not to hear.
His violence thou fear not, being such,
As wee, not capable of death or pain,
Can either not receive, or can repell.
His fraud is then thy fear, which plain infers
Thy equal fear that my firm Faith and Love
Can by his fraud be shak'n or seduced;
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy breast

Adam, missthought of her to thee so dear?



To whom with healing words Adam replied.

 Daughter of God and Man, immortal
Eve,
For such thou art, from sin and blame entire:
Not diffident of thee do I dissuade

Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid
The attempt it self, intended by our Foe.
For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses
The tempted with dishonour foul, supposed
Not incorruptible of Faith, not prooff
Against temptation: thou thy self with scorn
And anger would resent the offered wrong,
Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then,
If such affront I labour to avert
From thee alone, which on us both at once
The Enemy, though bold, will hardly dare,
Or daring, first on me th'assault shall light.
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn;
Subtle he needs must be, who could seduce
Angels, nor think superfluous others aid.
I from the influence of thy looks receive
Access in every Virtue, in thy sight
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on,
Shame to be overcome or overreached
Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite.
Why should not thou like sense within thee feel
When I am present, and thy trial choose
With me, best witness of thy Virtue tried.



So spake domestic Adam in his care
And Matrimonial Love; but Eve, who thought
Less attributed to her Faith sincere,
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewed.



If this be our condition, thus to dwell
In narrow circuit straitened by a Foe,
Subtle or violent, we not endued
Single with like defence, wherever met,
How are we happy, still in fear of harm?
But harm precedes not sin: only our Foe

Tempting affronts us with his foul esteem
Of our integrity: his foul esteem
Sticks no dishonour on our Front, but turns
Foul on himself; then wherefore shunned or feared
By us? who rather double honour gain
From his surmise proved false, find peace within,
Favour from Heaven, our witness from The event.
And what is Faith, Love, Virtue unassaid
Alone, without exterior help sustained?
Let us not then suspect our happy State
Left so imperfect by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single or combined.
Frail is our happiness, if this be so,
And Eden were no Eden thus exposed.



To whom thus Adam fervently replied.

 O Woman, best are all things as the
will
Of God ordained them, his creating hand
Nothing imperfect or deficient left
Of all that he Created, much less Man,
Or aught that might his happy State secure,
Secure from outward force; within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receive no harm.
But God left free the Will, for what obeys
Reason, is free, and Reason he made right,
But bid her well beware, and still erect,
Least by some fair appearing good surprised
She dictate false, and misinform the Will
To do what God expressly hath forbid,
Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoins,
That I should mind thee oft, and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve,
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the Foe suborned,


And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
Were better, and most likely if from me
Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
Would thou approve thy constancy, approve
First thy obedience; the other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But if thou think, trial unsought may find
Us both securer then thus warned thou seem,
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more;
Go in thy native innocence, rely
On what thou has of virtue, summon all,
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.



So spake the Patriarch of Mankind, but Eve

Persisted, yet submiss, though last, replied.



With thy permission then, and thus forewarned
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touched only, that our trial, when least sought,
May find us both perhaps far less prepared,
The willinger I go, nor much expect
A Foe so proud will first the weaker seek;
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.

 Thus saying, from her Husbands hand
her hand
Soft she withdrew, and like a Wood-Nymph light

Oread or Dryad, or 
of Delia's Train,
Betook her to the Groves, but Delia's self
In gate surpassed and Goddess-like deport,
Though not as she with Bow and Quiver armed,
But with such Gardening Tools as Art yet rude,
Guiltless of fire had formed, or Angels brought.
To Pales, or Pomona thus adorned,
Likeliest she seemed, Pomona when she fled

Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her Prime,

Yet Virgin of Proserpina from Jove.
Her long with ardent look his Eye pursued
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Oft he to her his charge of quick return
Repeated, she to him as oft engaged
To be returned by Noon amid the Bower,
And all things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or Afternoons repose.
O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve,
Of thy presumed return! event perverse!
Thou never from that hour in Paradise

Foundst either sweet repast, or sound repose;
Such ambush hid among sweet Flours and Shades
To intercept thy way, or send thee back
Despoiled of Innocence, of Faith, of Bliss.
For now, and since first break of dawn the Fiend,
Mere Serpent in appearance, forth was come,
And on his Quest, where likeliest he might find
The only two of Mankind, but in them
The whole included Race, his purposed prey.
In Bower and Field he sought, where any tuft
Of Grove or Garden-Plot more pleasant lay,
Their tendency or Plantation for delight,
By Fountain or by shady Rivulet
He sought them both, but wished his hap might find

Eve separate, he wished, but not with hope
Of what so seldom chanced, when to his wish,
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies,
Veiled in a Cloud of Fragrance, where she stood,
Half spied, so thick the Roses bushing round
About her glowd, oft stooping to support
Each Flour of slender stalk, whose head though gay
Carnation, Purple, Azure, or spect with Gold,


Hung drooping unsustaind, them she upstaies
Gently with Myrtle band, mindless the while,
Her self, though fairest unsupported Flour,
From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh.
Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed
Of stateliest Covert, Cedar, Pine, or Palm,
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen
Among thick-wov'n Arborets and Flours
Imborderd on each Bank, the hand of Eve:
Spot more delicious then those Gardens feigned
Or of revived Atones, or renowned

Alcinous, host of old Laertes Son,
Or that, not Mystic, where the Sapient King
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian Spouse.
Much he the Place admired, the Person more.
As one who long in populous City pent,
Where Houses thick and Sewers annoy the Air,
Forth issuing on a Summers Morn to breathe
Among the pleasant Villages and Farms
Adjoynd, from each thing met conceives delight,
The smell of Grain, or tedded Grass, or Kine,
Or Dairy, each rural sight, each rural sound;
If chance with Nymphlike step fair Virgin pass,
What pleasing seemed, for her now pleases more,
She most, and in her look sums all Delight.
Such Pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This flowery Plat, the sweet recess of Eve

Thus early, thus alone; her Heavenly form
Angelic, but more soft, and Feminine,
Her graceful Innocence, her every Air
Of gesture or lest action overawd
His Malice, and with rapine sweet bereaved
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:
That space the Evil one abstracted stood

From his own evil, and for the time remained
Stupidly good, of enmity disarmed,
Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge;
But the hot Hell that always in him burns,
Though in mid Heaven, soon ended his delight,
And tortures him now more, the more he sees
Of pleasure not for him ordained: then soon
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites.



Thoughts, whither have ye led me, with what sweet
Compulsion thus transported to forget
What hither brought us, hate, not love, nor hope
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy,
Save what is in destroying, other joy
To me is lost.  Then let me not let pass
Occasion which now smiles, behold alone
The Woman, opportune to all attempts,
Her Husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb
Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould,
Foe not informidable, exempt from wound,
I not; so much hath Hell debased, and pain
Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven.
She fair, divinely fair, fit Love for Gods,
Not terrible, though terror be in Love
And beauty, not approached by stronger hate,
Hate stronger, under show of Love well feigned,
The way which to her ruin now I tend.



So spake the Enemy of Mankind, enclosed
In Serpent, Inmate bad, and toward Eve

Addressed his way, not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as since, but on his rear,


Circular base of rising folds, that tour'd
Fouled above fouled a surging Maze, his Head
Crested aloft, and Carbuncle his Eyes;
With burnished Neck of verdant Gold, erect
Amidst his circling Spires, that on the grass
Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape,
And lovely, never since of Serpent kind
Lovelier, not those that in Illyria changed

Hermione and Cadmus, or the God
In Epidaurus; nor to which transformed

Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline was seen,
He with Olympias, this with her who bore

Scipio the height of Rome.  With tract oblique
At first, as one who sought access, but feared
To interrupt, side-long he works his way.
As when a Ship by skilful Stearsman wrought
Nigh Rivers mouth or Foreland, where the Wind
Verse oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her Sail;
So varied he, and of his tortuous Train
Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve,
To lure her Eye; she busied heard the sound
Of rustling Leaves, but minded not, as used
To such disport before her through the Field,
From every Beast, more duteous at her call,
Then at Circean call the Herd disguised.
He boulder now, uncalled before her stood;
But as in gaze admiring: Oft he bowd
His turret Crest, and sleek enamelled Neck,
Fawning, and licked the ground whereon she trod.
His gentle dumb expression turned at length
The Eye of Eve to mark his play; he glad
Of her attention gained, with Serpent Tongue
Organic, or impulse of vocal Air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began.




Wonder not, soverign Mistress, if perhaps
Thou can, who art sole Wonder, much less arm
Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain,
Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze
Insatiate, I thus single, nor have feared
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired.
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair,
Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
By gift, and thy Celestial Beauty adore
With ravishment beheld, there best beheld
Where universally admired; but here
In this enclosure wild, these Beasts among,
Beholders rude, and shallow to discern
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who sees thee? (and what is one?) who should be seen
A Goddess among Gods, adored and served
By Angels numberless, thy daily Train.



So gloz'd the Tempter, and his Proem tuned;
Into the Heart of Eve his words made way,
Though at the voice much marvelling; at length
Not unamaz'd she thus in answer spake.

 What may this mean? Language of Man
pronounced
By Tongue of Brute, and human sense expressed?
The first at lest of these I thought denied
To Beasts, whom God on their Creation-Day
Created mute to all articulate sound;
The latter I demur, for in their looks
Much reason, and in their actions oft appears.
Thee, Serpent, subtlest beast of all the field
I knew, but not with human voice endued;
Redouble then this miracle, and say,
How came thou speakable of mute, and how
To me so friendly grown above the rest
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight?


Say, for such wonder claims attention due.



To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied.

 Empress of this fair World,
resplendent Eve,
Easy to me it is to tell thee all
What thou command, and right thou should be obeyed:
I was at first as other Beasts that graze
The trodden Herb, of abject thoughts and low,
As was my food, nor aught but food discerned
Or Sex, and apprehended nothing high:
Till on a day roving the field, I chanced
A goodly Tree far distant to behold
Laden with fruit of fairest colours mixed,
Ruddy and Gold: I nearer drew to gaze;
When