ath.
This Paradise I give thee, count it thine
To Till and keep, and of the Fruit to eat:
Of every Tree that in the Garden grows
Eat freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth:
But of the Tree whose operation brings
Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set
The Pledge of thy Obedience and thy Faith
Amid the Garden by the Tree of Life
Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste,
And shun the bitter consequence: for know,
The day thou eats thereof, my sole command
Transgressed, inevitably thou shalt dye;
From that day mortal, and this happy State
Shalt loose, expelled from hence into a World
Of woe and sorrow.   Sternly he
pronounced
The rigid interdiction, which resounds
Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice
Not to incur; but soon his clear aspect
Returned and gracious purpose thus renewed.

 Not only these fair bounds, but all
the Earth
To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords
Possess it, and all things that therein live,
Or live in Sea, or Air, Beast, Fish, and Foul.
In sign whereof each Bird and Beast behold
After their kinds; I bring them to receive
From thee their Names, and pay thee fealty
With low subjection; understand the same
Of Fish within their watery residence,
Not hither summoned, since they cannot change
Their Element to draw the thinner Air.


 As thus he spake, each Bird and
Beast behold
Approaching two and two, These cowering low
With blandishment, each Bird stooped on his wing.
I named them, as they passed, and understood
Their Nature, with such knowledge God endued
My sudden apprehension: but in these
I found not what me thought I wanted still;
And to the Heavenly vision thus presumed.



O by what Name, for thou above all these,
Above mankind, or aught then mankind higher,
Surpassest far my naming, how may I
Adore thee, Author of this Universe,
And all this good to man, for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal
Thou has provided all things: but with me
I see not who partakes.  In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright,
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied. 

 What call thou solitude, is not
the Earth
With various living creatures, and the Air
Replenished, and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee, know thou not
Their language and their ways, they also know,
And reason not contemptibly; with these
Find pastime, and bear rule; thy Realm is large.

 So spake the Universal Lord, and
seemed
So ordering.  I with leave of speech implored,
And humble deprecation thus replied.


Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power,
My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
has thou not made me here thy substitute,
And these inferior far beneath me set?

Among unequals what society
Can sort, what harmony or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received; but in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss
Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight, wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort; they rejoice
Each with their kind, Lion with Lioness;
So fitly them in pairs thou has combined;
Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Foul
So well converse, nor with the Ox the Ape;
Worse then can Man with Beast, and least of all.
Where to the almighty answered, not displeased. 

 A nice and subtle happiness I see
Thou to thy self propose, in the choice
Of thy Associates, Adam, and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What think thou then of me, and this my State,
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all Eternity, for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse
Save with the Creatures which I made, and those
To me inferior, infinite descents
Beneath what other Creatures are to thee?

 He ceased, I lowly answered. To
attain
The height and depth of thy Eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things;
Thou in thy self art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficiency found; not so is Man,

But in degree, the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help,
Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
Should propagate, already infinite;
And through all numbers absolute, though One;
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his Image multiplied,
In unity defective, which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secrecy although alone,
Best with thy self accompanied, seek not
Social communication, yet so pleased,
Can raise thy Creature to what height thou wilt
Of Union or Communion, deified;
I by conversing cannot these erect
From prone, nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found, which gained
This answer from the gracious voice Divine. 



Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased,
And find thee knowing not of Beasts alone,
Which thou has rightly named, but of thy self,
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My Image, not imparted to the Brute,
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely should dislike,
And be so minded still; I, ere thou spoke,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone,
And no such company as then thou saw
Intended thee, for trial only brought,
To see how thou could judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,

Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.



He ended, or I heard no more, for now
My earthly by his Heavenly overpowered,
Which it had long stood under, strained to the height
In that celestial Colloquy sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense,
Dazzle d and spent, sunk down, and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
By Nature as in aide, and closed mine eyes.
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the Cell
Of Fancy my internal sight, by which
Abstract as in a trance methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood;
Who stooping opened my left side, and took
From thence a Rib, with cordial spirits warm,
And Life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:
The Rib he formed and fashioned with his hands;
Under his forming hands a Creature grew,
Manlike, but different Sex, so lovely fair,
That what seemed fair in all the World, seemed now
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained
And in her looks, which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her Air inspired
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
She disappeared, and left me dark, I waked
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not far off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable: On she came,

Led by her Heavenly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice, nor uninformed
Of nuptial Sanctity an