 sad; O what are these,
Deaths Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousandfould the sin of him who slew
His Brother; for of whom such massacher
Make they but of their Brethren, men of men?
But who was that Just Man, whom had not Heaven
Rescued, had in his Righteousness bin lost?



To whom thus Michael.
 These are the product
Of those ill mated Marriages thou saw;

Where good with bad were matched, who of themselves
Abhor to join; and by imprudence mixed,
Produce prodigious Births of body or mind.
Such were these Giants, men of high renown;
For in those days Might only shall be admired,
And Valour and Heroic Virtue called;
To overcome in Battle, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human Glory, and for Glory done
Of triumph, to be styled great Conquerors,
Patrons of Mankind, Gods, and Sons of Gods,
Destroyers rightlier called and Plagues of men.
Thus Fame shall be achieved, renown on Earth,
And what most merits fame in silence hid.
But he the seventh from thee, whom thou behold
The only righteous in a World perverse,
And therefore hated, therefore so beset
With Foes for daring single to be just,
And utter odious Truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints: Him the most High
Rapt in a balmy Cloud with winged Steeds
Did, as thou saw, receive, to walk with God
High in Salvation and the Climes of bliss,
Exempt from Death; to show thee what reward
Awaits the good, the rest what punishment?
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.



He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed,
The brazen Throat of War had ceased to roar,
All now was turned to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feast and dance,
Marrying or prostituting, as befell,
Rape or Adultery, where passing fair
Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broils.


At length a Reverend Sire among them came,
And of their doings great dislike declared,
And testified against their ways; he oft
Frequented their Assemblies, whereso met,
Triumphs or Festivals, and to them preached
Conversion and Repentance, as to Souls
In Prison under Judgements imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceased
Contending, and removed his Tents far off;
Then from the Mountain hewing Timber tall,
Began to build a Vessel of huge bulk,
Measured by Cubit, length, and breadth, and height,
Smeared round with Pitch, and in the side a door
Contrived, and of provisions laid in large
For Man and Beast: when lo a wonder strange1
Of every Beast, and Bird, and Insect small
Came sevens, and pairs, and entered in, as taught
Their order: last the Sire, and his three Sons
With their four Wives; and God made fast the door.
Meanwhile the Southwind rose, and with black wings
Wide hovering, all the Clouds together drove
From under Heaven; the Hills to their supply
Vapour, and Exhalation dusk and moist,
Sent up amain; and now the thickened Sky
Like a dark Ceeling stood; down rushed the Rain
Impetuous, and continued till the Earth
No more was seen; the floating Vessel swum
Uplifted; and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting o'er the Waves, all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmed, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water rolled; Sea covered Sea,
Sea without shore; and in their Palaces
Where luxury late reigned, Sea-monsters whelped
And stabled; of Mankind, so numerous late,

All left, in one small bottom swum embarked.
How did thou grieve then, Adam, to behold
The end of all thy Offspring, end so sad,
Depopulation; thee another Flood,
Of tears and sorrow a Flood thee also drowned,
And sunk thee as thy Sons; till gently reared
By th'Angel, on thy feet thou stood at last,
Though comfortless, as when a Father mourns
His Children, all in view destroyed at once;
And scarce to th'Angel utterdst thus thy plaint.



O Visions ill foreseen! better had I
Lived ignorant of future, so had borne
My part of evil only, each days lot
Enough to bear; those now, that were dispensed
The burden of many Ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth
Abortive, to torment me ere their being,
With thought that they must be.  Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall
Him or his Children, evil he may be sure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent,
And he the future evil shall no less
In apprehension then in substance feel
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped
Famine and anguish will at last consume
Wandering that watery Desert: I had hope
When violence was ceased, and War on Earth,
All would have then gon well, peace would have crowned
With length of happy days the race of man;
But I was far deceived; for now I see
Peace to corrupt no less then War to waste.
How comes it thus? unfold, Celestial Guide,
And whether here the Race of man will end.



 To whom thus Michael.
 Those whom last thou saw
In Triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
First seen in acts of prowess eminent
And great exploits, but of true virtue void;
Who having spilt much blood, and don much waste
Subduing Nations, and achieved thereby
Fame in the World, high titles, and rich prey,
Shall change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,
Surfeit, and lust, till wantonness and pride
Raise out of friendship hostile deeds in Peace.
The conquered also, and enslaved by War
Shall with their freedom lost all virtue loose
And fear of God, from whom their piety feigned
In sharp contest of Battle found no aide
Against invaders; therefore cooled in zeal
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,
Worldly or dissolute, on what their Lords
Shall leave them to enjoy; for the Earth shall bear
More then enough, that temperance may be tried:
So all shall turn degenerate, all depraved,
Justice and Temperance, Truth and Faith forgot;
One Man except, the only Son of light
In a dark Age, against example good,
Against allurements, custom, and a World
Offended; fearless of reproach and scorn,
Or violence, he of their wicked ways
Shall them admonish, and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe,
And full of peace, denouncing wrath to come
On their impenitence; and shall return
Of them derided, but of God observed
The one just Man alive; by his command
Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou behold,
To save himself and household from amidst

A World devote to universal rack.
No sooner he with them of Man and Beast
Select for life shall in the Ark be lodged,
And sheltered round, but all the Cataracts
Of Heaven set open on the Earth shall power
Rain day and night, all fountains of the Deep
Broke up, shall heave the Ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise
Above the highest Hills: then shall this Mount
Of Paradise by might of Waves be moved
Out of his place, pushed by the horned flood,
With all his verdure spoiled, and Trees adrift
Down the great River to the opening Gulf,
And there take root an Island salt and bare,
The haunt of Seals and Orcs, and Sea-mews clang.
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctity, if none be thither brought
By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now what further shall ensue, behold.



He looked, and saw the Ark hull on the flood,
Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled,
Driven by a keen North-winde, that blowing dry
Wrinkled the face of Deluge, as decayed;
And the clear Sun on his wide watery Glass
Gazed hot, and of the fresh Wave largely drew,
As after thirst, which made their flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole
With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopped
His Sluices, as the Heaven his windows shut.
The Ark no more now flotes, but seems on ground
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed.
And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appear;
With clamour thence the rapid Currents drive
Towards the retreating Sea their furious tide.


Forthwith from out the Arc a Raven flies,
And after him, the surer messenger,
A Dove sent forth once and again to spy
Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light;
The second time returning, in his Bill
An Olive leaf he brings, pacific sign:
Anon dry ground appears, and from his Arc
The ancient Sire descends with all his Train;
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds
A dewy Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow
Conspicuous with three listed colours gay,
Betok'ning peace from God, and Covenant new.
Whereat the heart of Adam erst so sad
Greatly rejoiced, and thus his joy broke forth.



O thou who future things can represent
As present, Heavenly instructor, I revive
At this last sight, assured that Man shall live
With all the Creatures, and their seed preserve.
Far less I now lament for one whole World
Of wicked Sons destroyed, then I rejoice
For one Man found so perfect and so just,
That God vouchsafed to raise another World
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven,
Distended as the Brow of God appeased,
Or serve they as a flowery verge to bind
The fluid skirts of that same watery Cloud,
Least it again dissolve and shower the Earth?



To whom the Archangel. 
Dexterously thou aim;
So willingly doth God remit his Ire,
Though late repenting him of Man depraved,
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole Earth filled with violence, and all flesh

Corrupting each their way; yet those removed,
Such grace shall one just Man find in his sight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind,
And makes a Covenant never to destroy
The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea
Surpass his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World
With Man therein or Beast; but when he brings
Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein set
His triple-coloured Bow, whereon to look
And call to mind his Covenant: Day and Night,
Seed time and Harvest, Heat and hoary Frost
Shall hold their course, till fire purge all things new,
Both Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.
The End of the Eleventh Book.

