 tasting, different degree
Disjoin us, and I then too late renounce
Deity for thee, when Fate will not permit.



Thus Eve with Countenance blithe her story told;
But in her Cheek distemper flushing glowed.
On the other side, Adam, soon as he heard
The fatal Trespass don by Eve, amazed,
Astonished stood and Blank, while horror chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joints relaxed;
From his slack hand the Garland wreathed for Eve

Down dropped, and all the faded Roses shed:
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length
First to himself he inward silence broke.



O fairest of Creation, last and best
Of all Gods works, Creature in whom excelled
Whatever can to sight or thought be formed,
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!
How art thou lost, how on a sudden lost,
Defaced, deflowered, and now to Death devote?
Rather how has thou yielded to transgress
The strict forbiddings, how to violate
The sacred Fruit forbidden! some cursed fraud
Of Enemy hath beguiled thee, yet unknown,


And me with thee hath ruined, for with thee
Certain my resolution is to Die;
How can I live without thee, how forgo
Thy sweet Converse and Love so dearly joined,
To live again in these wilde Woods forlorn?
Should God create another Eve, and I
Another Rib afford, yet loss of thee
Would never from my heart; no no, I feel
The Link of Nature draw me: Flesh of Flesh,
Bone of my Bone thou art, and from thy State
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.

 So having said, as one from sad
dismay
Recomfort, and after thoughts disturbed
Submitting to what seemed remediless,
Thus in calm mood his Words to Eve he turned.



Bold deed thou has presumed, adventurous Eve,
And peril great provoked, who thus hath dared
Had it been only coveting to Eye
That sacred Fruit, sacred to abstinence,
Much more to taste it under ban to touch.
But past who can recall, or don undo?
Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate, yet so
Perhaps thou shalt not Die, perhaps the Fact
Is not so heinous now, foretasted Fruit,
Profaned first by the Serpent, by him first
Made common and unhallowed ere our taste;
Nor yet on him found deadly, he yet lives,
Lives, as thou said, and gains to live as Man
Higher degree of Life, inducement strong
To us, as likely tasting to attain
Proportional ascent, which cannot be
But to be Gods, or Angels Demigods.
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,
Though threatening, will in earnest so destroy

Us his prime Creatures, dignified so high,
Set over all his Works, which in our Fall,
For us created, needs with us must fail,
Dependent made; so God shall uncreate,
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour loose,
Not well conceived of God, who though his Power
Creation could repeat, yet would be loath
Us to abolish, least the Adversary
Triumph and say;  Fickle their State
whom God
Most Favours, who can please him long; Me first
He ruined, now Mankind; whom will he next?

 Matter of scorn, not to be given
the Foe,
However I with thee have fixed my Lot,
Certain to undergo like doom, if Death
Consort with thee, Death is to me as Life;
So forcible within my beart I feel
The Bond of Nature draw me to my own,
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine;
Our State cannot be severed, we are one,
One Flesh; to loose thee were to loose my self.



So Adam, and thus Eve to him replied.

 O glorious trial of exceeding Love,
Illustrious evidence, example high1
Engaging me to emulate, but short
Of thy perfection, how shall I attain,

Adam, from whose dear side I boast me sprung,
And gladly of our Union hear thee speak,
One Heart, one Soul in both; whereof good prooff
This day affords, declaring thee resolved,
Rather then Death or aught then Death more dread
Shall separate us, linked in Love so dear,
To undergo with me one Guilt, one Crime,
If any be, of tasting this fair Fruit,
Whose virtue, for of good still good proceeds,


Direct, or by occasion hath presented
This happy trial of thy Love, which else
So eminently never had bin known.
Were it I thought Death menaced would ensue
This my attempt, I would sustain alone
The worst, and not persuade thee, rather die
Deserted, then oblige thee with a fact
Pernicious to thy Peace, chiefly assured
Remarkably so late of thy so true,
So faithful Love unequalled; but I feel
Far otherwise The event, not Death, but Life
Augmented, opened Eyes, new Hopes, new Joys,
Taste so Divine, that what of sweet before
Hath touched my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh.
On my experience, Adam, freely taste,
And fear of Death deliver to the Winds.



So saying, she embraced him, and for joy
Tenderly wept, much won that he his Love
Had so ennobled, as of choice to incur
Divine displeasure for her sake, or Death.
In recompense (for such compliance bad
Such recompense best merits) from the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing Fruit
With liberal hand: he scrupled not to eat
Against his better knowledge, not deceived,
But fondly overcome with Female charm.
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again
In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan,
Sky lowered and muttering Thunder, some sad drops
Wept at completing of the mortal Sin
Original; while Adam took no thought,
Eating his fill, nor Eve to iterate
Her former trespass feared, the more to soothe
Him with her loved society, that now

As with new Wine intoxicated both
They swim in mirth, and fancy that they feel
Divinity within them breeding wings
Where to to scorn the Earth: but that false Fruit
Far other operation first displayed,
Carnal desire inflaming, he on Eve

Began to cast lascivious Eyes, she him
As wantonly repaid; in Lust they burn:
Till Adam thus'gan Eve to dalliance move,




Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste,
And elegant, of Sapience no small part,
Since to each meaning savour we apply,
And Palate call judicious; I the praise
Yield thee, so well this day thou has purveyed.
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained
From this delightful Fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished,
For this one Tree had bin forbidden ten.
But come, so well refreshed, now let us play,
As meet is, after such delicious Fare;
For never did thy Beauty since the day
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned
With all perfections, so inflame my sense
With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now
Then ever, bounty of this virtuous Tree.



So said he, and forbore not glance or toy
Of amorous intent, well understood
Of Eve, whose Eye darted contagious Fire.
Her hand he seized, and to a shady bank,
Thick overhead with verdant roof embowered
He led her nothing loath; Flours were the Couch,
Pansies, and Violets, and Asphodel,
And Hyacinth, Earths freshest softest lap.


There they their fill of Love and Loves disport
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the Seal,
The solace of their sin, till dewy sleep
Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play.
Soon as the force of that fallacious Fruit,
That with exhilarating vapour bland
About their spirits had plaid, and inmost powers
Made err, was now exhaled, and grosser sleep
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams
Encumbered, now had left them, up they rose
As from unrest, and each the other viewing,
Soon found their Eyes how opened, and their minds
How darkened; innocence, that as a veil
Had shadowed them from knowing ill, was gon,
Just confidence, and native righteousness
And honour from about them, naked left
To guilty shame he covered, but his Robe
Uncovered more, so rose the Danite strong

Herculean Samson from the Harlot-lap
Of Philistean Dalilah, and waked
Shorn of his strength, They destitute and bare
Of all their virtue: silent, and in face
Confounded long they sate, as stricken mute,
Till Adam, though not less then Eve abashed,
At length gave utterance to these words constrained.




Eve, in evil hour thou did give ear
To that false Worm, of whomsoever taught
To counterfeit Mans voice, true in our Fall,
False in our promised Rising; since our Eyes
Opened we find indeed, and find we know
Both Good and Evil, Good lost, and Evil got,
Bad Fruit of Knowledge, if this be to know,
Which leaves us naked thus, of Honour void,
Of Innocence, of Faith, of Purity,

Our wonted Ornaments now soiled and stained,
And in our Faces evident the signs
Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store;
Even shame, the last of evils; of the first
Be sure then.  How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy
And rapture so oft beheld? those heavenly shapes
Will dazzle now this earthly, with their blaze
Insufferably bright.  O might I here
In solitude live savage, in some glade
Obscured, where highest Woods impenetrable
To Star or Sun-light, spread their umbrage broad
And brown as Evening: Cover me ye Pines,
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more.
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may from the present serve to hide
The Parts of each for other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen,
Some Tree whose broad smooth Leaves together sowed,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Those middle parts, that this new summer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.



So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest Wood, there soon they chose
The Figtree, not that kind for Fruit renowned,
But such as at this day to Indians known
In Malabar or Deacon spreads her Arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended Twigs take root, and Daughters grow
About the Mother Tree, a Pillard shade
High overarched, and echoing Walks between;
There oft the Indian Herdsman shunning heat
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing Herds


At Loopholes cut through thickest shade: Those Leaves
They gathered, broad as Amazonian Cargo,
And with what skill they had, together sowed,
To gird their waste, vain Covering if to hide
Their guilt and dreaded shame; O how unlike
To that first naked Glory.  Such of late

Columbus found theAmerican so girt
With feathered Cincture, naked else and wilde
Among the Trees on Isles and woody Shores.
Thus fenced, and as they thought, their shame in part
Coverd, but not at rest or ease of Mind,
They sate them down to weep, nor only Tears
Reined at their Eyes, but high Winds worse within
Began to rise, high Passions, Anger, Hate,
Mistrust, Suspicion, Discord, and shook sore
Their inward State of Mind, calm Region once
And full of Peace, now tossed and turbulent:
For Understanding ruled not, and the Will
Heard not her lore, both in subjection now
To sensual Appetite, who from beneath
Usurping over soverign Reason claimed
Superior sway: from thus distempered breast,

Adam, estranged in look and altered stile,
Speech intermittent thus to Eve renewed.



Would thou had hearkened to my words, and stayed
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
Desire of wandering this unhappy Morn,
I know not whence possessed thee; we had then
Remained still happy, not as now, despoiled
Of all our good, shamed, naked, miserable.
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve
The Faith they owe; when earnestly they seek
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail.



To whom soon moved with touch of blame thus Eve.


 What words have past thy Lips, Adam
severe,
Imput'st thou that to my default, or will
Of wandering, as thou call it, which who knows
But might as ill have happened thou being by,
Or to thy self perhaps: had thou been there,
Or here the attempt, thou could not have discerned
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake;
No ground of enmity between us known,
Why he should mean me ill, or seek to harm.
Was I to have never parted from thy side?
As good have grown there still a lifeless Rib.
Being as I am, why did not thou the Head
Command me absolutely not to go,
Going into such danger as thou said?
Too facile then thou did not much gainsay,
Nay did permit, approve, and fair dismiss.
Had thou bin firm and fixed in thy dissent,
Neither had I transgressed, nor thou with me.



To whom then first incensed Adam replied,

 Is this the Love, is this the
recompense
Of mine to thee, ungrateful Eve, expressed
Immutable when thou were lost, not I,
Who might have lived and joyed immortal bliss,
Yet willingly chose rather Death with thee:
And am I now upbraided, as the cause
Of thy transgressing? not enough severe,
It seems, in thy restraint: what could I more?
I warned thee, I admonished thee, foretold
The danger, and the lurking Enemy
That lay in wait; beyond this had bin force,
And force upon free will hath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on, secure
Either to meet no danger, or to find
Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps

I also erred in overmuch admiring
What seemed in thee so perfect, that I thought
No evil dared attempt thee, but I rue
That error now, which is become my crime,
And thou the Accuser.  Thus it shall befall
Him who to worth in Women overtrusting
Lets her will rule; restraint she will not brook,
And left to her self, if evil thence ensue,
She first his weak indulgence will accuse.



Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning,
And of their vain contest appeared no end.
The End of the Ninth Book.

