
            Paradise Lost. Book V.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            Morning approached, Eve relates to Adam her
troublesome  dream; he likes it not, yet comforts her: They come
forth to their  day labours; Their Morning Hymn at the Door of their Bower.
 God to  render Man inexcusable sends Raphael to admonish
him of  his obeaudience, of his free estate, of his enemy near at 
hand; who he is, and why his enemy, and whatever else may avail 
Adam to know. Raphael comes down to   Paradise,
his appearance described, his coming  discerned by Adam afar
off sitting at the door of his Bower; he  goes out to meet him, brings
him to his lodge, entertains  him with the choicest fruits of
Paradise got  together by Eve;their
discourse at Table: Raphael  performs his message, minds Adam
of his state and of his enemy;  relates at Adams request who
that enemy is, and how he came to  be so, beginning from his first
revolt in Heaven, and the  occasion thereof; how he drew his Legions
after him to the parts  of the 

 North, and there incited  them to rebel
with him, perswading all but only Abdiel a  Seraph, who
in Arguemeant dissuades and opposes him, then  forsakes him.


NOw Morn her rosie steps in the Eastern Clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with Orient Pearl,
When Adam waked, so customed, for his sleep
Was Aerie light from pure digestion bred,
And temperate vapors bland, which the only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan,
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill Matin Song
Of Birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve

With Tresses discomposed, and glowing Cheek,
As through unquiet rest: he on his side
Leaning half-raised, with looks of cordial Love
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld
Beauty, which whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voice
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus.
 Awake
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heavens last best gift, my ever new delight,
Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us, we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove,
What drops the Myrrh, and what the balmy Reed,
How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee
Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.



Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye 
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake.





O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My Glory, my Perfection, glad I see
Thy face, and Morn returned, for I this Night, 

Such night till this I never passed, have dreamed,
If dreamed, not as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day passed, or morrows next design,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksome night;  methought
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk
With gentle voice, I though it thine; it said,
Why sleeps thou Eve?  now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake
Tunes sweetest his love-labor'd song; now reigns
Full Orbed the Moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowy sets off the face of things; in vain,
If none regard; Heaven wakes with all his eyes,
Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire,
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the Tree
Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seemed,
Much fairer to my Fancy then by day:
And as I wondering looked, beside it stood
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven
By us oft seen; his dewy locks distilled

Ambrosia; on that Tree he also gazed;
And O fair Plant, said he, with
fruit surcharged,
Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,
Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despised?
Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste?
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy offered good, why else set here?
This said he paused not, but with venturous Arm 


He plucked, he tasted; me damp horror chilled
At such bold words vouched with a deed so bold:
But he thus overjoyed,  O Fruit
Divine,
Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropped,
Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit
For God's, yet able to make Gods of Men:
And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant grows,
The Author not impaired, but honoured more?
Here, happy Creature, fair Angelic Eve,
Partake thou also; happy though thou art,
Happier thou may be, worthier can not be:
Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confined,
But sometimes in the Air, as wee, sometimes
Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
What life the Gods live there, and such live thou.
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had plucked; the pleasant savoury smell
So quickened appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the Clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The Earth outstretched immense, a prospect wide
And various: wondering at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly
My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O how glad I waked
To find this but a dream!  Thus Eve
her  Night
Related, and thus Adam answered sad.



Best image of my self and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear; 

Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure. But know that in the Soul
Are many lesser Faculties that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senses represent,
She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,
Which Reason joining or disjoining, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell when Nature rests,
Oft in her absence mimic Fancy wakes
To imitate her; but misjoining shapes,
Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams,
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Some such resemblances methinks I find
Of our last Evenings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange; yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come or go, so unproved, and leave
No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou did abhor to dream,
Waking thou never wilt consent to do.
Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks
That wont to be more cheerful and serene
Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World,
And let us to our fresh employments rise
Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours
That open now their choicest bosomed smells
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.



So cheered he his fair Spouse, and she was cheered,
But silently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair;
Two other precious drops that ready stood, 

Each in their Crystal sluice, he ere they fell
Kissed as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious awe, that feared to have offended.


So all was cleared, and to the Field they haste.
But first from under shady arborous roof,
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of day-spring, and the Sun, who scarce up risen
With wheels yet hovering o'er the Ocean brim,
Shot parallel to the earth his dewy ray,
Discovering in wide Landscape all the East
Of Paradise and Edens happy Plains,
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began
Their Orisons, each Morning duly paid
In various style, for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced or sung
Unmeditated, such prompt eloquence
Flowed from their lips, in Prose or numerous Verse,
More tuneable then needed Lute or Harp
To add more sweetness, and they thus began.



These are thy glorious works, Parent of  good,
Almighty, thine this universal Frame,
Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then!
Unspeakable, who first above these Heavens
To us invisible or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works, yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine:
Speak ye who best can tell, ye Sons of light,
Angels, for ye behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, Day without Night,
Circle his Throne rejoicing, ye in Heaven,
On Earth join all ye Creatures to extol
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of Stars, last in the train of Night, 

If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crowns the smiling Morn
With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Sphere
While day arises, that sweet hour of Prime.
Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soul,
Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climbst,
And when high Noon has gained, and when thou falls.
Moon, that now meets the orient Sun, now fliest
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their Orb that flies,
And ye five other wandering Fires that move
In mystic Dance not without Song, resound
His praise, who out of Darkness called up Light,
Air, and ye Elements the eldest birth
Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion run
Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things, let your ceaseless change
Vary to our great Maker still new praise.
Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise
From Hill or steaming Lake, dusky or grey,
Till the Sun paint your fleecy skirts with Gold,
In honour to the Worlds great Author rise;
Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd sky,
Or wet the thirsty Earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling still advance his praise.
His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow,
Breathe soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave.
Fountains and ye, that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.
Join voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds,
That singing up to Heaven gate ascend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise;
Ye that in Waters glide, and ye that walk 

The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;
Witness if I be silent, Morn or Even,
To Hill, or Valley, Fou