d thus by fraud, though joined
With his own folly? that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art Judge
Of all things made, and judge only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfil
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
Or proud return though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplished and to Hell
Draw after him the whole Race of mankind,
By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy self
Abolish thy Creation, and unmake,
For him, what for thy glory thou has made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questioned and blasphemed without defence.



To whom the great Creator thus replied.

 O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief
delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All has thou spok'n as my thoughts are, all
As my Eternal purpose hath decreed:
Man shall not quite be lost, but saved who will,
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsafed; once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthralled
By sin to foul exorbitant desires;
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe,
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fallen condition is, and to me ow
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace
Elect above the rest; so is my will: 

The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warned
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offered grace
Invites; for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To Prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavoured with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide
My Umpire Conscience, whom if they will hear,
Light after light well used they shall attain,
And to the end persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance and my day of grace
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;
But hard be hardened, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall;
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not don; Man disobeying,
Disloyal breaks his fealty, and sins
Against the high Supremacy of Heaven,
Affecting God-head, and so loosing all,
To expiate his Treason hath nought left,
But to destruction sacred and devote,
He with his whole posterity must dye,
Dye he or Justice must; unless for him
Some other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say Heavenly powers, where shall we find such love,
Which of ye will be mortal to redeem
Mans mortal crime, and just the unjust to save,
Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?



He asked, but all the Heavenly Quire stood mute,
And silence was in Heaven: on mans behalf 


Patron or Intercessor none appeared,
Much less that dared upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have bin lost, adjudged to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fullness dwells of love divine,
His dearest mediation thus renewed.



Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace;
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought,
Happy for man, so coming; he her aide
Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost;
Atonement for himself or offering meet,
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring:
Behold me then, me for him, life for life
I offer, on me let thine anger fall;
Account me man; I for his sake will leave
Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee
Freely put off, and for him lastly dye
Well pleased, on me let Death wreck all his rage;
Under his gloomy power I shall not long
Lie vanquished; thou has given me to possess
Life in my self for ever, by thee I live,
Though now to Death I yield, and am his due
All that of me can die, yet that debt paid,
Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave
His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soul
For ever with corruption there to dwell;
But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue
My vanquisher, spoiled of his vented spoil;
Death his deaths wound shall then receive, and stoop
Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed. 


I through the ample Air in Triumph high
Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound.  Thou at the sight
Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
While by thee raised I ruin all my Foes,
Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave:
Then with the multitude of my redeemed
Shall enter Heaven long absent, and return,
Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
Of anger shall remain, but peace assured,
And reconciling; wrath shall be no more
Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire.



His words here ended, but his meek aspect
Silent yet spake, and breathed immortal love
To mortal men, above which only shone
Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
Glad to be offered, he attends the will
Of his great Father.  Admiration seized
All Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend
Wondering; but soon the Almighty thus replied:



O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace
Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou
My sole complacence! well thou know how dear,
To me are all my works, nor Man the least
Though last created, that for him I spare
Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost.
Thou therefore whom thou only can redeem,
Their Nature also to thy Nature join;
And be thy self Man among men on Earth,
Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed,
By wondrous birth: Be thou in Adams room
The Head of all mankind, though Adams Son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee 

As from a second root shall be restored,
As many as are restored, without thee none.
His crime makes guilty all his Sons, thy merit
Imputed shall absolve them who renounce
Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
Receive new life.  So Man, as is most just,
Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die,
And dying rise, and rising with him raise
His Brethren, ransomed with his own dear life.
So Heavenly love shall outdo Hellish hate
Giving to death, and dying to redeem,
So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate
So easily destroyed, and still destroys
In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor shalt thou by descending to assume
Mans Nature, lesson or degrade thine own.
Because thou has, though Throned in highest bliss
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
God-like fruition, quited all to save
A World from utter loss, and has been found
By Merit more then Birthright Son of God,
Found worthiest to be so by being Good,
Far more then Great or High; because in thee
Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds,
Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt
With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne;
Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt Reign
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed universal King, all Power
I give thee, reign for ever, and assume
Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supreme
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce:
All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide 


In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell;
When thou attended gloriously from Heaven
Shalt in the Sky appear, and from thee send
The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaim
Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Winds
The living, and forthwith the cited dead
Of all past Ages to the general Doom
Shall hasten, such a peal shall rouse their sleep.
Then all thy Saints assembled, thou shalt judge
Bad men and Angels, they arraigned shall sink
Beneath thy Sentence; Hell, her numbers full,
Thenceforth shall be for ever shut.  Mean while
The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring
New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell,
And after all their tribulations long
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth.
Then thou thy regal Sceptre shalt lay by,
For regal Sceptre then no more shall need,
God shall be All in All.  But all ye Gods,
Adore him, who to compass all this dies,
Adore the Son, and honour him as me.



No sooner had the Almighty ceased, but all
The multitude of Angels with a shout
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet
As from blessed voices, uttering joy, Heaven rung
With Jubilee, and loud Hosannas filled
The eternal Regions: lowly reverent
Towards either Throne they bow, and to the gr