of his Throne he thus began.


 Effulgence of my Glory, Son beloved,
Son in whose face invisible is beheld
Visibly, what by Deity I am,
And in whose hand what by Decree I doe,
Second Omnipotence, two days are past,
Two days, as we compute the days of Heaven,
Since Michael and his Powers went forth to tame
These disobedient; sore hath been their fight,
As likeliest was, when two such Foes met armed;
For to themselves I left them, and thou know,
Equal in their Creation they were formed,
Save what sin hath impaired, which yet hath wrought
Insensibly, for I suspend their doom;
Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last
Endless, and no solution will be found:
War wearied hath performed what War can do,
And to disordered rage let loose the reins,
With Mountains as with Weapons armed, which makes
Wild work in Heaven, and dangerous to the maine.
Two days are therefore past, the third is thine;
For thee I have ordained it, and thus far
Have suffered, that the Glory may be thine
Of ending this great War, since none but Thou
Can end it.  Into thee such Virtue and Grace
Immense I have transfused, that all may know
In Heaven and Hell thy Power above compare,
And this perverse Commotion governed thus,
To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir
Of all things, to be Heir and to be King
By Sacred Unction, thy deserved right.
Go then thou Mightiest in thy Fathers might,
Ascend my Chariot, guide the rapid Wheels
That shake Heavens basis, bring forth all my War,
My Bow and Thunder, my Almighty Arms


Gird on, and Sword upon thy puissant Thigh;
Pursue these sons of Darkness, drive them out
From all Heavens bounds into the utter Deep:
There let them learn, as likes them, to despise
God and Messiah his anointed King.



He said, and on his Son with Rays direct
Shone full, he all his Father full expressed
Ineffably into his face received,
And thus the filial Godhood answering spake.



O Father, O Supreme of heavenly Thrones,
First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou always seeks
To glorify thy Son, I always thee,
As is most just; this I my Glory account,
My exaltation, and my whole delight,
That thou in me well pleased, declare thy will
Fulfilled, which to fulfil is all my bliss.
Sceptre and Power, thy giving, I assume,
And gladlier shall resign, when in the end
Thou shalt be All in All, and I in thee
For ever, and in me all whom thou love:
But whom thou hates, I hate, and can put on
Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on,
Image of thee in all things; and shall soon,
Armed with thy might, rid heaven of these rebelled,
To their prepared ill Mansion driven down
To chains of darkness, and the undying Worm,
That from thy just obedience could revolt,
Whom to obey is happiness entire.
Then shall thy Saints unmixed, and from th'impure
Far separate, circling thy holy Mount
Unfeigned Halleluiahs to thee sing,
Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief.
So said, he o'er his Sceptre bowing, rose
From the right hand of Glory where he sate,

And the third sacred Morn began to shine
Dawning through Heaven: forth rushed with whirlwind sound
The Chariot of Paternal Deity,                   
Flashing thick flames, Wheel within Wheel undrawn,
It self instinct with Spirit, but convoyed
By four Cherubic shapes, four Faces each
Had wondrous, as with Stars their bodies all
And Wings were set with Eyes, with Eyes the wheels
Of Beril, and careering Fires between;
Over their heads a crystal Firmament,
Whereon a Sapphire Throne, inlaid with pure
Amber, and colours of the shower Arch.
He in Celestial Panoply all armed
Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought,
Ascended, at his right hand Victory
Sate Eagle-winged, beside him hung his Bow
And Quiver with three-bolted Thunder stored,
And from about him fierce Effusion rolled
Of smoke and bickering flame, and sparkles dire;
Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints,
He onward came, far off his coming shone,
And twenty thousand (I their number heard)
Chariots of God, half on each hand were seen:
He on the wings of Cherub rode sublime
On the Crystalline Sky, in Sapphire Throned.
Illustrious far and wide, but by his own
First seen, them unexpected joy surprised,
When the great Ensign of Messiah blazed
Aloft by Angels born, his Sign in Heaven:
Under whose conduct Michael soon reduced
His Army, circumfus'd on either Wing,
Under their Head embodied all in one.
Before him Power Divine his way prepared;
At his command the uprooted Hills retired

Each to his place, they heard his voice and went
Obsequious, Heaven his wonted face renewed,
And with fresh Flowerets Hill and Valley smiled.
This saw his hapless Foes but stood obdur'd,
And to rebellious fight rallied their Powers
Insensate, hope conceiving from despair.
In heavenly Spirits could such perverseness dwell?
But to convince the proud what Signs avail,
Or Wonders move th'obdurate to relent?
They hardened more by what might most reclaim,
Grieving to see his Glory, at the sight
Took envy, and aspiring to his height,
Stood reimbattell'd fierce, by force or fraud
Weaning to prosper, and at length prevail
Against God and Messiah, or to fall
In universal ruin last, and now
To final Battle drew, disdaining flight,
Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God
To all his Host on either hand thus spake.



Stand still in bright array ye Saints, here  stand
Ye Angels armed, this day from Battle rest;
Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God
Accepted, fearless in his righteous Cause,
And as ye have received, so have ye don
Invincibly; but of this cursed crew
The punishment to other hand belongs,
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints;
Number to this days work is not ordained
Nor multitude, stand only and behold
Gods indignation on these Godless poured
By me, not you but me they have despised,
Yet envied; against me is all their rage,
Because the Father, They whom in Heaven supreme
Kingdom and Power and Glory appertains,

Hath honoured me according to his will.
Therefore to me their doom he hath assigned;
That they may have their wish, to try with me
In Battle which the stronger proves, they all,
Or I alone against them, since by strength
They measure all, of other excellence
Not emulous, nor care who them excels;
Nor other strife with them do I voutchsafe.



So spake the Son, and into terror changed
His countenance too severe to be beheld
And full of wrath bent on his Enemies.
At once the Four spread out their Starry wings
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the Orbs
Of his fierce Chariot rolled, as with the sound
Of torrent Floods, or of a numerous Host.
He on his impious Foes right onward drove,
Gloomy as Night; under his burning Wheels
The steadfast Empyrean shook throughout,
All but the Throne it self of God.  Full soon
Among them he arrived; in his right hand
Grasping ten thousand Thunders, which he sent
Before him, such as in their Souls infixed
Plagues; they astonished all resistance lost,
All courage; down their idle weapons dropped;
O'er Shields and Helmes, and helmet heads he rode
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate,
That wished the Mountains now might be again
Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire.
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell
His arrows, from the fourfold-visag'd Four,
Distinct with eyes, and from the living Wheels
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes,
One Spirit in them ruled, and every eye
Glared lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire

Among th'accurst, that withered all their strength,
And of their wonted vigour left them drained,
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen.
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked
His Thunder in mid Volly, for he meant
Not to destroy, but root them out of Heaven:
The overthrown he raised, and as a Heard
Of Goats or timorous flock together thronged
Drove them before him Thunder-struck, pursued
With terrors and with furies to the bounds
And Crystal wall of Heaven, which opening wide,
Rolled inward, and a spacious Gap disclosed
Into the wistful Deep; the monstrous sight
Struck them with horror backward, but far worse
Urged them behind; headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of Heaven, Eternal wrath
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.


Hell heard th'unsufferable noise, Hell saw
Heaven ruining from Heaven and would have fled
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep
Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound.
Nine days they fell; confounded Chaos roared,
And felt tenfold confusion in their fall
Through his wilde Anarchy, so huge a rout
Encumbered him with ruin: Hell at last
Yawning received them whole, and on them closed,
Hell their fit habitation fraught with fire
Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain.
Disburdened Heaven rejoiced, and soon repaired
Her mural breach, returning whence it rolled.
Sole Victor from th'expulsion of his Foes

Messiah his triumphal Chariot turned:
To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood
Eye witnesses of his Almighty Acts,

With Jubilee advanced; and as they went,
Shaded with branching Palm, each order bright,
Sung Triumph, and him sung Victorious King,
Son, Heir, and Lord, to him Dominion given,
Worthiest to Reign: he celebrated rode
Triumphant through mid Heaven, into the Courts
And Temple of his mighty Father Throned
On high: who into Glory him received,
Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss.


Thus measuring things in Heaven by things on Earth
At thy request, and that thou may beware
By what is past, to thee I have revealed
What might have else to human Race bin hid;
The discord which befell, and War in Heaven
Among the Angelic Powers, and the deep fall
Of those too high aspiring, who rebelled
With Satan, he who envies now thy state,
Who now is plotting how he may seduce
Thee also from obedience, that with him
Bereaved of happiness thou may partake
His punishment, Eternal misery;
Which would be all his solace and revenge,
As a despite don against the most High,
Thee once to gain Companion of his woe.
But list'n not to his Temptations, warn
Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard
By terrible Example the reward
Of disobedience; firm they might have stood,
Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress.
The End of the Sixth Book.

