
            Paradise Lost. BOOK XII.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            The Angel Michael continues from the Flood to relate
what  shall succeed; then, in the mention of Abraham, comes by
 degrees to explain, who that Seed of the Woman shall be, which  was
promised Adam and Eve in the Fall; his Incarnation, 
Death, Resurrection, and Ascention; the state of the Church till  his
second Coming. Adam greatly satisfied and recomfort by 
these Relations and Promises descends the Hill with 
Michael; wakens Eve, who all this while had slept,
but with  gentle dreams composed to quietness of mind and submission. 
Michael in either hand leads them out of                                
     
Paradise, the fiery Sword waving behind  them, and
the Cherubim taking their Stations to guard the  Place,



AS one who in his journey bates at Noon,
Though bent on speed, so hear the Archangel paused
Betwixt the world destroyed and world restored,
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose;
Then with transition sweet new Speech resumes.



Thus thou has seen one World begin and end;
And Man as from a second stock proceed.
Much thou has yet to see, but I perceive
Thy mortal sight to fail; objects divine
Must needs impair and weary human sense:
Henceforth what is to come I will relate,
Thou therefore give due audience, and attend.
This second sours of Men, while yet but few;
And while the dread of judgement past remains
Fresh in their minds, fearing the Deity,
With some regard to what is just and right
Shall lead their lives, and multiply apace,
Labouring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop,
Corn wine and oil; and from the herd or flock,
Oft sacrificing Bullock, Lamb, or Kid,
With large Wine-offerings poured, and sacred Feast,
Shall spend their days in joy unblamed, and dwell
Long time in peace by Families and Tribes
Under paternal rule; till one shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart, who not content
With fair equality, fraternal state,
Will arrogate Dominion undeserved
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and law of Nature from the Earth,
Hunting (and Men not Beasts shall be his game)
With War and hostile snare such as refuse

Subjection to his Empire tyrannous:
A mighty Hunter thence he shall be styled
Before the Lord, as in despite of Heaven,
Or from Heaven climbing second Sovereignty;
And from Rebellion shall derive his name,
Though of Rebellion others he accuse.
He with a crew, whom like Ambition joins
With him or under him to tyrannise,
Marching from Eden towards the West, shall find
The Plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge
Boils out from under ground, the mouth of Hell;
Of Brick, and of that stuff they cast to build
A City and Tower, whose top may reach to Heaven;
And get themselves a name, least far dispersed
In foreign Lands their memory be lost
Regardless whether good or evil fame.
But God who oft descends to visit men
Unseen, and through their habitations walks
To mark their doings, them beholding soon,
Comes down to see their City, ere the Tower
Obstruct Heaven Towers, and in derision sets
Upon their Tongues a various Spirit to raise
Quite out their Native Language, and instead
To sow a jangling noise of words unknown:
Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud
Among the Builders; each to other calls
Not understood, till hoarse, and all in rage,
As mocked they storm; great laughter was in Heaven
And looking down, to see the hubbub strange
And hear the din; thus was the building left
Ridiculous, and the work Confusion named.





Where to thus Adam fatherly displeased.

 O execrable Son so to aspire

Above his Brethren, to himself assuming
Authority usurped, from God not given:
He gave us only over Beast, Fish, Fowl
Dominion absolute; that right we hold
By his donation; but Man over men
He made not Lord; such title to himself
Reserving, human left from human free.
But this Usurper his encroachment proud
Stays not on Man; to God his Tower intends
Siege and defiance: Wretched man! what food
Will he convey up thither to sustain
Himself and his rash Army, where thin Air
Above the Clouds will pine his entrails gross,
And famish him of Breath, if not of Bread?



To whom thus Michael. 
 Justly thou abhorr'st
That Son, who on the quiet state of men
Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue
Rational Liberty; yet know withal,
Since thy original lapse, true Liberty
Is lost, which always with right Reason dwells
Twinned, and from her hath no dividual being:
Reason in man obscured, or not obeyed,
Immediately inordinate desires
And upstart Passions catch the Government
From Reason, and to servitude reduce
Man till then free.  Therefore since he permits
Within himself unworthy Powers to reign
Over free Reason, God in judgement just
Subjects him from without to violent Lords;
Who oft as undeservedly enthral
His outward freedom: Tyranny must be,
Though to the Tyrant thereby no excuse.
Yet sometimes Nations will decline so low

From virtue, which is reason, that no wrong,
But Justice, and some fatal curse annexed
Deprives them of their outward liberty,
Their inward lost: Witness th'irreverent Son
Of him who built the Ark, who for the shame
Don to his Father, heard this heavy curse,


Servant of Servants, on his vicious Race.
Thus will this latter, as the former World,
Still tend from bad to worse, till God at last
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw
His presence from among them, and avert
His holy Eyes; resolving from thenceforth
To leave them to their own polluted ways;
And one peculiar Nation to select
From all the rest, of whom to be invoked,
A Nation from one faithful man to spring:
Him on this side Euphrates yet residing,
Bred up in Idol-worship; O that men
(Can thou believe?) should be so stupid grown,
While yet the Patriarch lived, who escaped the Flood,
As to forsake the living God, and fall
To worship their own work in Wood and Stone
For Gods! yet him God the most High vouchsafed
To call by Vision from his Fathers house,
His kindred and false Gods, into a Land
Which he will show him, and from him will raise
A mighty Nation, and upon him shower
His benediction so, that in his Seed
All Nations shall be blessed; he straight obeys,
Not knowing to what Land, yet firm believes:
I see him, but thou can not, with what Faith
He leaves his Gods, his Friends, and native Soil

Ur of Chald??a, passing now the Ford

To Haran, after him a cumbrous Train
Of Herds and Flocks, and numerous servitude;
Not wandering poor, but trusting all his wealth
With God, who called him, in a land unknown.

Canaan he now attains, I see his Tents
Pitched about Sachem, and the neighbouring Plain
Of Moreh; there by promise he receives
Gift to his Progeny of all that Land;
From Hamath Northward to the Desert South
(Things by their names I call, though yet unnamed)
From Hormone East to the great Western Sea,
Mount Hormone, yonder Sea, each place behold
In prospect, as I point them; on the shore
Mount Carmel; here the double-founted stream

Jordan, true limit Eastward; but his Sons
Shall dwell to Senir, that long ridge of Hills.
This ponder, that all Nations of the Earth
Shall in his Seed be blessed; by that Seed
Is meant thy great deliverer, who shall bruise
The Serpents head; whereof to thee anon