
            Paradise Lost. Book IV.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            
Satan now in prospect of Eden,  and nigh the
place where he  must now attempt the bold enterprise which he undertook
 alone against God and Man, falls into many doubts with himself,  and
many passions, fear, envy, and despair;  but at length  confirms himself
in evil, journeys on to Paradise,  whose outward prospect
and situation is described, overleaps the  bounds, sits in the shape of
a Cormorant on the Tree of life, as  highest in the Garden to look
about him.  The Garden  decribbed; Satan's first sight of
Adam and Eve; his  wonder at their excellent form and
happy state, but with  resolution to work their fall; overhears their discourse,
 thence gathers that the Tree of knowledge was forbidden them to  eat
of, under penalty of death; and thereon intends to found his 
Temptation, by seducing them to transgress: then leaves them  a
while, to know further of their state by some other means.   Meanwhile
Uriel descending on a Sun-beam warns Gabriel, who 
had in charge the Gate of Paradise, 

 that some evil spirit had escaped the
Deep, and  past at Noon by his Sphere in the shape of a good Angel
down  to Paradise, discovered after by his furious 
gestures in the Mount. Gabriel promises to find him ere 
morning.  Night coming on, Adam and Eve, discourse
of going  to their rest: their Bower described; their Evening worship. 
Gabriel drawing forth his Bands of Night-watch to walk the 
round of Paradise, appoints two strong Angels to 
Adams Bower, least the evil spirit should be there doing some
 harm to Adam or Eve sleeping; there they find him
at the ear  of Eve,tempting her in a dream, and bring him,
though  unwilling, to Gabriel;  by whom questioned, he
scornfully  answers, prepares resistance, but hindered by a Sign from
Heaven,  flies out of Paradise.


O For that warning voice, which he who saw
TheApocalypse, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be revenged on men,


 Wo to the
inhabitants on  Earth!
 that now,
While time was, our first-Parents had bin warned
The coming of their secret foe, and escaped
Happily so escaped his mortal snare; for now

Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down,
The Tempter ere the Accuser of man-kind,
To wreck on innocent frail man his loss
Of that first Battle, and his flight to Hell:
Yet not rejoicing in his speed, though bold,
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth
Now rolling, boils in his tumultuous breast,
And like a devilish Engine back recoils
Upon himself; horror and doubt distract 

His troubled thoughts, and from the bottom stir
The Hell within him, for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step no more then from himself can fly
By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair
That slumberd, wakes the bitter memory
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes towards Eden which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grieved look he fixes sad,
Sometimes towards Heaven and the full-blazing Sun,
Which now sat high in his Meridian Tower:
Then much revolving, thus in sighs began.



O thou that with surpassing Glory crowned,
Look from thy sole Dominion like the God
Of this new World; at whose sight all the Stars
Hide their diminished heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name
O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy Sphere;
Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down
Warring in Heaven against Heavens matchless King:
Ah wherefore! he deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.
What could be less then to afford him praise,
The easiest recompense, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good proved ill in me,
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
I stained subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude, 


So burdensome still paying, still to ow;
Forgetful what from him I still received,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and discharged; what burden then?
O had his powerful Destiny ordained
Me some inferior Angel, I had stood
Then happy; no unbounded hope had raised
Ambition.  Yet why not? some other Power
As great might have aspired, and me though mean
Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within
Or from without, to all temptations armed.
Had thou the same free Will and Power to stand?
Thou had: whom has thou then or what to accuse,
But Heavens free Love dealt equally to all?
Be then his Love accursed, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay cursed be thou; since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
Me miserable! which way shall I fly
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair?
Which way I fly is Hell; my self am Hell;
And in the lowest deep a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.
O then at last relent: is there no place
Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left?
None left but by submission; and that word

Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises and other vaunts
Then to submit, boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent.  Ay me, they little know 

How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
Under what torments inwardly I groan;
While they adore me on the Throne of Hell,
With Diadem and Sceptre high advanced
The lower still I fall, only Supreme
In misery; such joy Ambition finds.
But say I could repent and could obtain
By Act of Grace my former state; how soon
Would height recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feigned submission swore: ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
For never can true reconciling grow
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my punisher; therefore as far
From granting he, as I from begging peace:.
All hope excluded thus, behold in stead
Of us out-cast, exiled, his new delight,
Mankind created, and for him this World.
So farewell Hope, and with Hope farewell Fear,
Farewell Remorse: all Good to me is lost;
Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least
Divided Empire with Heavens King I hold
By thee, and more then half perhaps will reign;
As Man ere long, and this new World shall know.



Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face
Thrice changed with pale, ire, envy and despair,
Which mart his borrowed visage, and betrayed
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld.
For heavenly minds from such distempers foul
Are ever clear.  Whereof he soon aware,
Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm, 

Artificer of fraud; and was the first
That practiced falsehood under saintly show,
Deep malice to conceal, couched with revenge:
Yet not enough had practiced to deceive

Uriel once warned; whose eye pursued him down
The way he went, and on theAssyrian mount
Saw him disfigured, more then could befall
Spirit of happy sort: his gestures fierce
He marked and mad demeanour, then alone,
As he supposed, all unobserved, unseen.
So on he fares, and to the border comes,
Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green,
As with a rural mound the champagne head
Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides
With thicket overgrown, gottesque and wilde,
Access denied; and over head up grew
Insuperable height of loftiest shade,
Cedar, and Pine, and Fur, and branching Palm,
A Sylvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend
Shade above shade, a woody Theatre
Of stateliest view.  Yet higher then their tops
The verdurous wall of paradise up sprung:
Which to our general Sire gave prospect large
Into his nether Empire neighbouring round.
And higher then that Wall a circling row
Of goodliest Trees laden with fairest Fruit,
Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue
Appeared, with gay enamelled colours mixed:
On which the Sun more glad impressed his beams
Then in fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow,
When God hath showered the earth; so lovely seemed
That Landscape: And of pure now purer air
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires 

Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair: now gentle gales
Fanning their odoriferous wings dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils.  As when to them who sail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past

Mozambic, off at Sea North-East winds blow

Sabean Odours from the spicy shore
Of Arabia the blessed, with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a League
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles.
So entertained those odorous sweets the Fiend
Who came their bane, though with them better pleased
Then Asmodeus with the fishy fume,
That drove him, though enamoured, from the Spouse
Of Tobits Son, and with a vengeance sent
From Media post to ??gypped, there fast
bound.


Now to The ascent of that steep savage Hill

Satan had journeyed on, pensive and slow;
But further way found none, so thick entwined,
As one continued brake, the undergrowth
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplexed
All path of Man or Beast that past that way:
One Gate there only was, and that looked East
On the other side: which when th'arch-fellon saw
Due entrance he disdained, and in contempt,
At one slight bound high over leaped all bound
Of Hill or highest Wall, and sheer within
Lights on his feet.  As when a prowling Wolf,
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey,
Watching where Shepherds pen their Flocks at eave
In hurdled Cotes amid the field secure,
Leaps o'er the fence with ease into the Fouled:.
Or as a Thief bent to unhoord the cash 

Of some rich Burgher, whose substantial doors,
Cross-barrd and bolted fast, fear no assault,
In at the window climbs, or o'er the tiles;
So clomb this first grand Thief into Gods Fouled:
So since into his Church lewd Hirelings climb.
Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life,
The middle Tree and highest there that grew,
Sat like a Cormorant; yet not true Life
Thereby regained, but sat devising Death
To them who lived; nor on the virtue thought
Of that life-giving Plant, but only used
For prospect, what well used had bin the pledge
Of immortality.  So little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use.
Beneath him with new wonder now he views
To all delight of human sense exposed
In narrow room Natures whole wealth, yea more,
A Heaven on Earth, for blissful Paradise

Of God the Garden was, by him in the East
Of Eden planted; Eden stretched her Line
From Auran Eastward to the Royal Towers
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian Kings,
Or where the Sons of Eden long before
Dwelt in Telassar: in this pleasant soil
His far more pleasant Garden God ordained;
Out of the fertile ground he cause to grow
All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;
And all amid them stood the Tree of Life,
High eminent, blooming Ambrosial Fruit
Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life
Our Death the Tree of knowledge grew fast by,
Knowledge of Good bought dear by knowing ill. 


Southward through Eden went a River large,
Nor changed his course, but through the shagg