d marriage Rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her Eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.
I overjoyed could not forbear aloud.


This turn hath made amends; thou has fulfilled
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,
Giver of all things fair, but fairest this
Of all thy gifts, nor enviest.  I now see
Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my Flesh, my Self
Before me; Woman is her Name, of Man
Extracted; for this cause he shall forgo
Father and Mother, and to his Wife adhere;
And they shall be one Flesh, one Heart, one Soul.


She heard me thus, and though divinely brought,
Yet Innocence and Virgin Modesty,
Her virtue and the conscience of her worth,
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retired,
The more desirable, or to say all,
Nature her self, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turned;
I followed her, she what was Honour knew,
And with obsequious Majesty approved
My pleaded reason.  To the Nuptial Bower
I led her blushing like the Morn: all Heaven,
And happy Constellations on that hour
Shed their selectest influence; the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each Hill;
Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales and gentle Aires
Whispered it to the Woods, and from their wings
Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicy Shrub,
Disporting, till the amorous Bird of Night

Sung Spousal, and bid haste the Evening Star
On his Hill top, to light the bridal Lamp.
Thus I have told thee all my State, and brought
My Story to the sum of earthly bliss
Which I enjoy, and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As used or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire, these delicacies
I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits, and Flours,
Walks, and the melody of Birds; but here
Far otherwise, transported I behold,
Transported touch; here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else
Superior and unmoved, here only weak
Against the charm of Beauties powerful glance.
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part
Not proof enough such Object to sustain,
Or from my side subducting, took perhaps
More then enough; at least on her bestowed
Too much of Ornament, in outward show
Elaborate, of inward less exact.
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her th'inferiour, in the mind
And inward Faculties, which most excel,
In outward also her resembling less
His Image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that Dominion given
O'er other Creatures; yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
And in her self complete, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest, best;
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded, Wisdom in discourse with her

Looses discountenanced, and like folly shows;
Authority and Reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally; and to consummate all,
Greatness of mind and nobleness their seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard Angelic placed.

 To whom the Angel with contracted
brow. 



Accuse not Nature, she hath don her part;
Do thou but thine, and be not diffident
Of Wisdom, she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou need her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thy self perceav'st.
For what admir'st thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love,
Not thy subjection: weigh with her thy self;
Then value: Oft times nothing profits more
Then self esteem, grounded on just and right
Well managed; of that skill the more thou know,
The more she will acknowledge thee her Head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honour thou may love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch whereby mankind
Is propagated seem such dear delight
Beyond all other, think the same Vouchsafed
To Cattle and each Beast; which would not be
To them made common and divulged, if aught
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue
The Soul of Man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her society thou finds


Attractive, human, rational, love still;
In loving thou does well, in passion not,
Wherein true Love consists not; love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges, hath his seat
In Reason, and is judicious, is the scale
By which to heavenly Love thou may ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure, for which cause
Among the Beasts no Mate for thee was found.



To whom thus half abashed Adam replied.

 Neither her out-side formed so fair,
nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds
(Though higher of the genial Bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem)
So much delights me as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with Love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of Mind, or in us both one Soul;
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful then harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing; yet still free
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love thou blanket me not, for love thou say
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide;
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask;
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their Love
Express they, by looks only, or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch? 



To whom the Angel with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosie red, Loves proper hue,
Answered.  Let it suffice thee
that thou know

Us happy, and without Love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoys
(And pure thou were created) we enjoy
In eminence, and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars:
Easier then Air with Air; if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, Union of Pure with Pure
Desiring; nor restrained conveyance need
As Flesh to mix with Flesh, or Soul with Soul.
But I can now no more; the parting Sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles

Hesperian sets, my Signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love, but first of all
Him whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command; take heed least Passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free Will
Would not admit; thine and of all thy Sons
The weal or woe in thee is placed; beware.
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blessed: stand fast; to stand or fall
Free in thine own Arbitrament it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require;
And all temptation to transgress repel.



So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction.  Since to
part,
Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose soverign goodness I adore.
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
With grateful Memory: thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return. 



So parted they, the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his Bower.
The End of the Eighth Book.

