
Paradise Lost. BOOK XI.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            The Son of God presents to his Father the Prayers of our
first Parents now repenting, and intercedes for them: God accepts them,
but declares that they must no longer abide in Paradise;
sends Michael with a Band of Cherubim to dispossess them; but
first to reveal to Adam future things: Michaels
coming down. Adam shows to
Eve certain ominous signs; he discerns Michaels
approach, goes out to meet him: the Angel denounces their departure.
Eve's Lamenttion. Adam pleads, but submits:
The Angel leads him up to a high Hill, sets before him in vision what
shall happ'n till the Flood.


THus they in lowliest plight repentant stood
Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above
Prevenient Grace descending had removed
The stony from their hearts, & made new flesh
Regenerate grow instead, that sighs now breathed

Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight
Then loudest Oratory: yet their port
Not of mean suitors, nor important less
Seemed their Petition, then when th'ancient Pair
In Fables old, less ancient yet then these,

Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha to restore
The Race of Mankind drowned, before the Shrine
Of Themis stood devout.  To Heaven their prayers
Flew up, nor mist the way, by envious winds
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passed
Dimentionless through Heavenly doors; then clad
With incense, where the Golden Altar fumed,
By their great Intercessor, came in sight
Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.



See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung
From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs
And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixed
With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring,
Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed
Sow'n with contrition in his heart, then those
Which his own hand manuring all the Trees
Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen
From innocence.  Now therefore bend thine ear
To supplication, hear his sighs though mute;
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him, me his Advocate
And propitiation, all his works on me
Good or not good engraft, my Merit those
Shall perfect, and for these my Death shall pay.
Accept me, and in me from these receive
The smell of peace toward Mankind, let him live
Before thee reconciled, at least his days

Numbered, though sad, till Death, his doom (which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse)
To better life shall yield him, where with me
All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss,
Made one with me as I with thee am one.



To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene.

All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain, all thy request was my Decree:
But longer in that Paradise to dwell,
The Law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal Elements that know
No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foul,
Eject him tainted now, and purge him off
As a distemper, gross to air as gross,
And mortal food, as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first
Distempered all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted.  I at first with two fair gifts
Created him endowed, with Happiness
And Immortality: that fondly lost,
This other served but to eternize woe;
Till I provided Death; so Death becomes
His final remedy, and after Life
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined
By Faith and faithful works, to second Life,
Waked in the renovation of the just,
Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed.
But let us call to Synod all the Blessed
Through Heavens wide bounds; from them I will not hide
My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant Angels late they saw;
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed.



He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright Minister that watched, he blew
 His Trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general Doom.  the Angelic blast
Filled all the Regions: from their blissful Bowers
Of Amarantin Shade, Fountain or Spring,
By the waters of Life, where ere they sate
In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light
Hasted, resorting to the Summons high,
And took their Seats; till from his Throne supreme
the almighty thus pronounced his soverign Will.



O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both Good and Evil, since his taste
Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast
His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got,
Happier, had it sufficed him to have known
Good by it self, and Evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
My motions in him, longer then they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain
Self-left.  Least therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the Garden forth to Till
The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soil.



Michael, this my behest have thou in charge,
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming Warriors, least the Fiend
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant possession some new trouble raise:.
has thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair,
From hallowed ground th'unholie, and denounce
To them and to their Progeny from thence


Perpetual banishment.  Yet least they faint
At the sad Sentence rigorously urged,
For I behold them softened and with tears
Bewailing their excess, all terror hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveal
To Adam what shall come in future days,
As I shall thee enlighten, intermix
My Covenant in the women's seed renewed;
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:
And on the East side of the Garden place,
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs,
Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame
Wide waving, all approach far off to fright,
And guard all passage to the Tree of Life:
Least Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foul, and all my Trees their prey,
With whose stolen Fruit Man once more to delude.



He ceased; and th'Archangelic Power prepared
For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each
Had, like a double Janus, all their shape
Spangled with eyes more numerous then those
Of Argus, and more wakeful then to drouze,
Charmed with Arcadian Pipe, the Pastoral Reed
Of Harms, or his opiate Rod.  Mean while
To resolute the World with sacred Light

Leucothea waked, and with fresh dews imbalmd
The Earth, when Adam and first Matron Eve

Had ended now their Orisons, and found
Strength added from above, new hope to spring
Out of despair, joy, but with fear yet linked;
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed.




Eve, easily may Faith admit, that all

The good which we enjoy, from Heaven descends;
But that from us ought should ascend to Heaven
So prevalent as to concern the mind
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer,
Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne
Even to the Seat of God.  For since I sought
By Prayer th'offended Deity to appease,
Kneeled and before him humbled all my heart,
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his ear; persuasion in me grew
That I was heard with favour; peace returned
Home to my Breast, and to my memory
His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe;
Which then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live.  Whence Hail to thee,

Eve rightly called, Mother of all Mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live, and all things live for Man.



To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek.

 Ill worthy I such title should
belong
To me transgressor, who for thee ordained
A help, became thy snare; to me reproach
Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I who first brought Death on all, am graced
The source of life; next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsafed,
Far other name deserving.  But the Field
To labour calls us now with sweat imposed,
Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn,
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins
Her rosie progress smiling; let us forth,


I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoined
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,
What can be toilsome in these pleasant Walks?
Here let us live, though in fallen state, content.



So spake, so wished much-humbled Eve, but Fate
Subscribed not; Nature first gave Signs, impressed
On Bird, Beast, Air, Air suddenly eclipsed
After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight
The Bird of Jove, stooped from his aerie tour,
Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove:
Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods,
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the Forest, Hart and Hind;
Direct to the Eastern Gate was bent their flight.

Adam observed, and with his Eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmoved to Eve thus spake.



O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh,
Which Heaven by these mute signs in Nature shows
Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn
Us happily too secure of our discharge
From penalty, because from death released
Some days; how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust,
And thither must return and be no more.
Why else this double object in our fight
Of flight pursued in the air and ore the ground
One way the self-same hour? why in the East
Darkness ere Days mid-course, and Morning light
More orient in yon Western Cloud that draws
O'er the blew Firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends, with something heavenly fraught.



He erred not, for by this the heavenly Bands
Down from a Sky of Jasper lighted now

In Paradise, and on a Hill made alt,
A glorious Apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adams eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met

Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw
The field Pavilion'd with hi