 compare with Heaven; and to taste
Think not I shall be nice.  So down
they sat,
And to their viands fell, nor seemingly
The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss
Of Theologians, but with keen dispatch
Of real hunger, and concoctive heat 

To transubstantiate; what redounds, transpires
Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fire
Of sooty coal the Empires Alchemist
Can turn, or holds it possible to turn
Metals of drossiest Ore to perfect Gold
As from the Mine. Mean while at Table Eve

Ministerd naked, and their flowing cups
With pleasant liquors crowned: O innocence
Deserving Paradise! if ever, then,
Then had the Sons of God excuse to have bin
Enamoured at that sight; but in those hearts
Love unlibidinous reigned, nor jealousy
Was understood, the injured Lovers Hell.


Thus when with meats and drinks they had sufficed,
Not burdened Nature, sudden mind arose
In Adam, not to let the occasion pass
Given him by this great Conference to know
Of things above his World, and of their being
Who dwell in Heaven, whose excellence he saw
Transcend his own so far, whose radiant forms
Divine effulgence, whose high Power so far
Exceeded human, and his wary speech
Thus to the Empyreal Minister he framed.



Inhabitant with God, now know I well
Thy favour, in this honour done to man,
Under whose lowly roof thou has Vouchsafed
To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste,
Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,
As that more willingly thou could not seem
As Heavens high feasts to have fed: yet what compare?



To whom the winged Hierarch replied.

 O Adam, one Almighty
is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return,
If not depraved from good, created all 


Such to perfection, one first matter all,
Endued with various forms various degrees
Of substance, and in things that live, of life;
But more refined, more spirituous, and pure,
As nearer to him placed or nearer tending
Each in their several active Spears assigned,
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds
Proportion to each kind. So from the root
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
More aerie, last the bright consummate flower
Spirits odorous breathes: flours and their fruit
Mans nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed
To vital Spirits aspire, to animal,
To intellectual, give both life and sense,
Fancy and understanding, whence the Soul
Reason receives, and reason is her being,
Discursive, or Intuitive; discourse
Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,
Differing but in degree, of kind the same.
Wonder not then, what God for you saw good
If I refuse not, but convert, as you,
To proper substance; time may come when men
With Angels may participate, and find
No inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare:
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps
Your bodies may at last turn all to Spirit,
Improved by tract of time, and winged ascend
Ethereal, as wee, or may at choice
Here or in Heavenly Paradises dwell;
If ye be found obedient, and retain
Unalterably firm his love entire
Whose progeny you are. Mean while enjoy
Your fill what happiness this happy state
Can comprehend, incapable of more. 




To whom the Patriarch of mankind replied,

 O favourable spirit, propitious
guest,
Well has thou taught the way that might direct
Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set
From center to circumference, whereon
In contemplation of created things
By steps we may ascend to God. But say,
What meant that caution joint,
if ye be found


Obedient? can we
want obedience then
To him, or possibly his love desert
Who formed us from the dust, and placed us here
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss
Human desires can seek or apprehend?



To whom the Angel.  Son of
Heaven and  Earth,
Attend: That thou are happy, owe to God;
That thou continu'st such, owe to thy self,
That is, to thy obedience; therein stand.
This was that caution given thee; be advised.
God made thee perfect, not immutable;
And good he made thee, but to persevere
He left it in thy power, ordained thy will
By nature free, not over-ruled by Fate
Inextricable, or strict necessity;
Our voluntary service he requires,
Not our necessitated, such with him
Finds no acceptance, nor can find, for how
Can hearts, not free, be tried whether they serve
Willing or no, who will but what they must
By Destiny, and can no other choose?
My self and all the Angelic Host that stand
In sight of God enthroned, our happy state
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds;
On other surety none; freely we serve,
Because wee freely love, as in our will 


To love or not; in this we stand or fall:
And some are fallen, to disobedience fallen,
And so from Heaven to deepest Hell; O fall
From what high state of bliss into what woe!



To whom our great Progenitor. 
Thy words
Attentive, and with more delighted ear,
Divine instructor, I have heard, then when
Cherubic Songs by night from neighbouring Hills
Aerial Music send: nor knew I not
To be both will and deed created free;
Yet that we never shall forget to love
Our maker, and obey him whose command
Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts
Assured me, and still assure: though what thou tells
Hath past in Heaven, some doubt within me move,
But more desire to hear, if thou consent,
The full relation, which must needs be strange,
Worthy of Sacred silence to be heard;
And we have yet large day, for scarce the Sun
Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins
His other half in the great Zone of Heaven.



Thus Adam made request, and Raphael

After short pause assenting, thus began.



High matter thou enjoin me, O prime of men,
Sad task and hard, for how shall I relate
To human sense the invisible exploits
Of warring Spirits; how without remorse
The ruin of so many glorious once
And perfect while they stood; how last unfold
The secrets of another world, perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good
This is dispensed, and what surmounts the reach
Of human sense, I shall delineate so,
By likening spiritual to corporal forms, 

As may express them best, though what if Earth
Be but the shadow of Heaven, and things therein
Each to other like, more then on earth is thought?


As yet this world was not, and Chaos wilde
Reigned where these Heavens now roll, where Earth now rests
Upon her Center poised, when on a day
(For Time, though in Eternity, applied
To motion, measures all things durable
By present, past, and future) on such day
As Heavens great Year brings forth, the Empyreal Host
Of Angels by Imperial summons called,
Innumerable before the almighty's Throne
Forthwith from all the ends of Heaven appeared
Under their Hierarchs in orders bright
Ten thousand thousand Ensigns high advanced,
Standards, and Gonfalons between Van and Rear
Stream in the Air, and for distinction serve
Of Hierarchies, of Orders, and Degrees;
Or in their glittering Tissues bear emblazed
Holy Memorials, acts of Zeal and Love
Recorded eminent. Thus when in Orbs
Of circuit inexpressible they stood,
Orb within Orb, the Father infinite,
By whom in bliss bosomed sat the Son,
Amidst as from a flaming Mount, whose top
Brightness had made invisible, thus spake.



Hear all ye Angels, Progeny of Light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
Hear my Decree, which unrevok't shall stand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My only Son, and on this holy Hill
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
At my right hand;  your Head I him appoint;
And by my Self have sworn to him shall bow 


All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord:
Under his great Vicegerent Reign abide
United as one individual Soul
For ever happy: him who disobeys
Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
Into utter darkness, deep engulfed, his place
Ordained without redemption, without end. 



So spake The Omnipotent, and with his words
All seemed well pleased, all seemed, but were not all.
That day, as other solemn days, they spent
In song and dance about the sacred Hill,
Mystical dance, which yonder starry Sphere
Of Planets and of fixed in all her Wheels
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
Eccentric, intervolv'd, yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem,
And in their motions harmony Divine
So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear
Listens delighted.  Evening now approached
(For wee have also our Evening and our Morn,
Wee ours for change delectable, not need)
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn
Desirous; all in Circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden piled
With Angels Food, and rubied Nectar flows
In Pearl, in Diamond, and massy Gold
Fruit of delicious Vines, the growth of Heaven.
On flours reposed, and with fresh flowerets crowned,
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet
Quaff immortality and joy, secure
Of surfeit where full measure only bounds
Excess, before the all bounteous King, who showered
With copious hand, rejoicing in their joy. 

Now when ambrosial Night with Clouds exhaled
From that high mount of God, whence light & shade
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changed
To grateful Twilight (for Night comes not there
In darker veil) and roseate Dews disposed
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest,
Wide over all the Plain, and wider far
Then all this globous Earth in Plain out spread,
(Such are the Courts of God) the Angelic throng
Dispersed in Bands and Files their Camp extend
By living Streams among the Trees of Life,
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reared,
Celestial Tabernacles, where they slept
Fannd with cool Winds, save those who in their course
Melodious Hymns about the soverign Throne
Alternate all night long: but not so waked

Satan, so call him now, his former name
Is heard no more in Heaven; he of the first,
If not the first Arch-Angel, great in Power,
In favour and in pr??eminence, yet fraught
With envy against the Son of God, that day
Honoured by his great Father, and proclaimed

Messiah King anointed, could not bear
Through pride that sight, & thought himself impaired.
Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the dusky hour
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolved
