
            Paradise Lost. Book II.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            The Consultation begun, Satan debates whether anothere
Battle be to be hazarded for the recovery of Heyven: some  advise
it, others dissuade:  A third proposal is preferred,  mentioned
before by Satan to search the truth of that Prophecy  or
Tradition in Heaven concerning another world, and another kind  of creature
equal or not much inferior to themselves, about  this time to be
created:  Their doubt who shall be sent on this  difficult search: Satan
their chief undertakes alone the  voyage, is honoured and applauded.
 The Council thus ended,  the rest betake them several ways and to
several employments, as  their inclinations lead them, to entertain the
time till 
Satan return.  He passes on his Journey to Hell Gates, 
finds them shut, and who sat there to guard them, by whom at  length
they are opened, and discover to him the great Gulf between  Hell and
Heaven;  with what difficulty he passes through,  directed by Chaos,
the Power of that place, to the sight of  this new World which he
sought.



HIgh on a Throne of Royal State, which far
Outshone the wealth of Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showers on her Kings Barbaric Pearl and Gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised
To that bad eminence; and from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain War with Heaven, and by success untaught
His proud imaginations thus displayed.



Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven,
For since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen,
I give not Heaven for lost.  From this descent
Celestial virtues rising, will appear
More glorious and more dread then from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate:
Me though just right, and the fixed Laws of Heaven
Did first create your Leader, next free choice,
With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight,
Hath bin achieved of merit, yet this loss
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
Established in a safe unenvied Throne
Yielded with full consent.  The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? where there is then no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From Faction; for none sure will claim in Hell 

Precedence, none, whose portion is so small
Of present pain, that with ambitious mind
Will covet more.  With this advantage then
To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord,
More then can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper then prosperity
Could have assured us; and by what best way,
Whether of open War or covert guile,
We now debate; who can advise, may speak.



He ceased, and next him Moloc, Sceptred King
Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heaven; now fiercer by despair:
His trust was with the Eternal to be deemed
Equal in strength, and rather then be less
Cared not to be at all; with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse
He reckoned not, and these words thereafter spake.



My sentence is for open War: Of Wiles,
More inexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need, not now.
For while they sit contriving, shall the rest,
Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait
The Signal to ascend, sit lingering here
Heavens fugitives, and for their dwelling place
Accept this dark opprobrious Den of shame,
The Prison of his Tyranny who Reigns
By our delay? no, let us rather choose
Armed with Hell flames and fury all at once
O'er Heavens high Towers to force resistless way,
Turning our Tortures into horrid Arms
Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise
Of his Almighty Engine he shall hear
Infernal Thunder, and for Lightning see 

Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels; and his Throne it self
Mixed with Tartarean Sulphur, and strange fire,
His own invented Torments.  But perhaps
The way seems difficult and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe.
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful Lake benumm not still,
That in our proper motion we ascend
Up to our native seat: descent and fall
To us is adverse.  Who but felt of late
When the fierce Foe hung on our broken Rear
Insulting, and pursued us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? The ascent is easy then;
The event is feared; should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction: