yed, and thus in haste to th'Angel cried.



O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed;
Is Piety thus and pure Devotion paid?



They whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied.

 These two are Brethren, Adam,
and to come
Out of thy loins; th'unjust the just hath slain,
For envy that his Brothers Offering found
From Heaven acceptance; but the bloody Fact
Will be avenged, and th'others Faith approved
Loose no reward, though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore.  To which
our Sire.



Alas, both for the deed and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death? Is this the way
I must return to native dust? O sight
Of terror, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!



To whom thus Michael.

 Death thou has seen
In his first shape on man; but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim Cave, all dismal; yet to sense
More terrible at th'entrance then within.
Some, as thou saw, by violent stroke shall die,
By Fire, Flood, Famine, by Intemperance more
In Meats and Drinks which on the Earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear; that thou may know
What misery th'inabstinence of Eve

Shall bring on men.   Immediately a
place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark,
A Laser-house it seemed, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased, all maladies
Of ghastly Spasm, or racking torture, qualms

Of heart-sick Agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs,
Intestine Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs,
Daelig;monies Frenzy, moaping Melancholy
And Moon-struck madness, pining Atrophy,
Marasmus, and wide-wasting Pestilence,
Dropsies, and Asthma's, and Joint-racking Rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair
Tended the sick busiest from Couch to Couch;
And over them triumphant Death his Dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of Rock could long
Drie-ey'd behold? Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of Woman born; compassion quelled
His best of Man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess,
And scarce recovering words his plaint renewed.



O miserable Mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
Better end hear unborn.  Why is life given
To be thus wrested from us? rather why
Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew
What we receive, would either not accept
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down,
Glad to be so dismissed in peace.  Can thus
Th'Image of God in man created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debas't
Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man,
Retaining still Divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And for his Makers Image sake exempt?




Their Makers Image,  answered
Michael,  then
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified
To serve ungoverned appetite, and took
His Image whom they served, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but their own,
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsome sickness, worthily, since they
Gods Image did not reverence in themselves.



I yield it just,  said Adam,
 and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To Death, and mix with our connatural dust;





There is,  said Michael,
 if thou well observe
The rule of not too much, by temperance taught
In what thou eats and drinks, seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So may thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop
Into thy Mothers lap, or be with ease
Gathered, not harshly plucked, for death mature:
This is old age; but then thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
To withered weak and gray; t