
            Paradise Lost. Book V.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            Morning approached, Eve relates to Adam her
troublesome  dream; he likes it not, yet comforts her: They come
forth to their  day labours; Their Morning Hymn at the Door of their Bower.
 God to  render Man inexcusable sends Raphael to admonish
him of  his obeaudience, of his free estate, of his enemy near at 
hand; who he is, and why his enemy, and whatever else may avail 
Adam to know. Raphael comes down to   Paradise,
his appearance described, his coming  discerned by Adam afar
off sitting at the door of his Bower; he  goes out to meet him, brings
him to his lodge, entertains  him with the choicest fruits of
Paradise got  together by Eve;their
discourse at Table: Raphael  performs his message, minds Adam
of his state and of his enemy;  relates at Adams request who
that enemy is, and how he came to  be so, beginning from his first
revolt in Heaven, and the  occasion thereof; how he drew his Legions
after him to the parts  of the 

 North, and there incited  them to rebel
with him, perswading all but only Abdiel a  Seraph, who
in Arguemeant dissuades and opposes him, then  forsakes him.


NOw Morn her rosie steps in the Eastern Clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with Orient Pearl,
When Adam waked, so customed, for his sleep
Was Aerie light from pure digestion bred,
And temperate vapors bland, which the only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan,
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill Matin Song
Of Birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve

With Tresses discomposed, and glowing Cheek,
As through unquiet rest: he on his side
Leaning half-raised, with looks of cordial Love
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld
Beauty, which whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voice
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus.
 Awake
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heavens last best gift, my ever new delight,
Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us, we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove,
What drops the Myrrh, and what the balmy Reed,
How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee
Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.



Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye 
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake.





O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My Glory, my Perfection, glad I see
Thy face, and Morn returned, for I this Night, 

Such night till this I never passed, have dreamed,
If dreamed, not as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day passed, or morrows next design,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksome night;  methought
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk
With gentle voice, I though it thine; it said,
Why sleeps thou Eve?  now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake
Tunes sweetest his love-labor'd song; now reigns
Full Orbed the Moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowy sets off the face of things; in vain,
If none regard; Heaven wakes with all his eyes,
Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire,
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the Tree
Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seemed,
Much fairer to my Fancy then by day:
And as I wondering looked, beside it stood
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven
By us oft seen; his dewy locks distilled

Ambrosia; on that Tree he also gazed;
And O fair Plant, said he, with
fruit surcharged,
Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,
Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despised?
Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste?
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy offered good, why else set here?
This said he paused not, but with venturous Arm