
            Paradise Lost. BOOK XII.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            The Angel Michael continues from the Flood to relate
what  shall succeed; then, in the mention of Abraham, comes by
 degrees to explain, who that Seed of the Woman shall be, which  was
promised Adam and Eve in the Fall; his Incarnation, 
Death, Resurrection, and Ascention; the state of the Church till  his
second Coming. Adam greatly satisfied and recomfort by 
these Relations and Promises descends the Hill with 
Michael; wakens Eve, who all this while had slept,
but with  gentle dreams composed to quietness of mind and submission. 
Michael in either hand leads them out of                                
     
Paradise, the fiery Sword waving behind  them, and
the Cherubim taking their Stations to guard the  Place,



AS one who in his journey bates at Noon,
Though bent on speed, so hear the Archangel paused
Betwixt the world destroyed and world restored,
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose;
Then with transition sweet new Speech resumes.



Thus thou has seen one World begin and end;
And Man as from a second stock proceed.
Much thou has yet to see, but I perceive
Thy mortal sight to fail; objects divine
Must needs impair and weary human sense:
Henceforth what is to come I will relate,
Thou therefore give due audience, and attend.
This second sours of Men, while yet but few;
And while the dread of judgement past remains
Fresh in their minds, fearing the Deity,
With some regard to what is just and right
Shall lead their lives, and multiply apace,
Labouring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop,
Corn wine and oil; and from the herd or flock,
Oft sacrificing Bullock, Lamb, or Kid,
With large Wine-offerings poured, and sacred Feast,
Shall spend their days in joy unblamed, and dwell
Long time in peace by Families and Tribes
Under paternal rule; till one shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart, who not content
With fair equality, fraternal state,
Will arrogate Dominion undeserved
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and law of Nature from the Earth,
Hunting (and Men not Beasts shall be his game)
With War and hostile snare such as refuse

Subjection to his Empire tyrannous:
A mighty Hunter thence he shall be styled
Before the Lord, as in despite of Heaven,
Or from Heaven climbing second Sovereignty;
And from Rebellion shall derive his name,
Though of Rebellion others he accuse.
He with a crew, whom like Ambition joins
With him or under him to tyrannise,
Marching from Eden towards the West, shall find
The Plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge
Boils out from under ground, the mouth of Hell;
Of Brick, and of that stuff they cast to build
A City and Tower, whose top may reach to Heaven;
And get themselves a name, least far dispersed
In foreign Lands their memory be lost
Regardless whether good or evil fame.
But God who oft descends to visit men
Unsee