d,
Far other name deserving.  But the Field
To labour calls us now with sweat imposed,
Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn,
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins
Her rosie progress smiling; let us forth,


I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoined
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,
What can be toilsome in these pleasant Walks?
Here let us live, though in fallen state, content.



So spake, so wished much-humbled Eve, but Fate
Subscribed not; Nature first gave Signs, impressed
On Bird, Beast, Air, Air suddenly eclipsed
After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight
The Bird of Jove, stooped from his aerie tour,
Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove:
Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods,
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the Forest, Hart and Hind;
Direct to the Eastern Gate was bent their flight.

Adam observed, and with his Eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmoved to Eve thus spake.



O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh,
Which Heaven by these mute signs in Nature shows
Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn
Us happily too secure of our discharge
From penalty, because from death released
Some days; how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust,
And thither must return and be no more.
Why else this double object in our fight
Of flight pursued in the air and ore the ground
One way the self-same hour? why in the East
Darkness ere Days mid-course, and Morning light
More orient in yon Western Cloud that draws
O'er the blew Firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends, with something heavenly fraught.



He erred not, for by this the heavenly Bands
Down from a Sky of Jasper lighted now

In Paradise, and on a Hill made alt,
A glorious Apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adams eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met

Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw
The field Pavilion'd with his Guardians bright;
Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeared
In Dothan, covered with a Camp of Fire,
Against the Syrian King, who to surprise
One man, Assassin-like had levied War,
War unproclam'd.  The Princely Hierarch
In their bright stand, there left his Powers to seize
Possession of the Garden; he alone,
To find where Adam sheltered, took his way,
Not unperceived of Adam, who to Eve,
While the great Visitant approached, thus spake.




Eve, now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determine, or impose
New Laws to be observed; for I descry
From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill
One of the heavenly Host, and by his Gate
None of the meanest, some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above, such Majesty
Invests him coming? yet not terrible,
That I should fear, nor sociably mild,
As Raphael, that I should much confide,
But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended; and The Arch-Angel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man
Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Arms
A military Vest of purple flowed
Livelier then Melib??an, or the grain
Of Sarra, worn by Kings and Hero's old


In time of Truce; lris had dipped the wooff;
His starry Helm unbuckled showed him prime
In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side
As in a glistening Zodiac hung the Sword,
Satan's dire dread, and in his hand the Spear.

Adam bowd low, he Kingly from his State
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.




Adam, Heavens high behest no Preface needs:
Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death,
Then due by sentence when thou did transgress,
Defeated of his seizure many days
Given thee of Grace, wherein thou may repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
May cover: well may then thy Lord appeased
Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claim;
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not; to remove thee I am come,
And send thee from the Garden forth to till
The ground whence thou was