r Fall,
False in our promised Rising; since our Eyes
Opened we find indeed, and find we know
Both Good and Evil, Good lost, and Evil got,
Bad Fruit of Knowledge, if this be to know,
Which leaves us naked thus, of Honour void,
Of Innocence, of Faith, of Purity,

Our wonted Ornaments now soiled and stained,
And in our Faces evident the signs
Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store;
Even shame, the last of evils; of the first
Be sure then.  How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy
And rapture so oft beheld? those heavenly shapes
Will dazzle now this earthly, with their blaze
Insufferably bright.  O might I here
In solitude live savage, in some glade
Obscured, where highest Woods impenetrable
To Star or Sun-light, spread their umbrage broad
And brown as Evening: Cover me ye Pines,
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more.
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may from the present serve to hide
The Parts of each for other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen,
Some Tree whose broad smooth Leaves together sowed,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Those middle parts, that this new summer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.



So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest Wood, there soon they chose
The Figtree, not that kind for Fruit renowned,
But such as at this day to Indians known
In Malabar or Deacon spreads her Arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended Twigs take root, and Daughters grow
About the Mother Tree, a Pillard shade
High overarched, and echoing Walks between;
There oft the Indian Herdsman shunning heat
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing Herds


At Loopholes cut through thickest shade: Those Leaves
They gathered, broad as Amazonian Cargo,
And with what skill they had, together sowed,
To gird their waste, vain Covering if to hide
Their guilt and dreaded shame; O how unlike
To that first naked Glory.  Such of late

Columbus found theAmerican so girt
With feathered Cincture, naked else and wilde
Among the Trees on Isles and woody Shores.
Thus fenced, and as they thought, their shame in part
Coverd, but not at rest or ease of Mind,
They sate them down to weep, nor only Tears
Reined at their Eyes, but high Winds worse within
Began to rise, high Passions, Anger, Hate,
Mistrust, Suspicion, Discord, and shook sore
Their inward State of Mind, calm Region once
And full of Peace, now tossed and turbulent:
For Understanding ruled not, and the Will
Heard not her lore, both in subjection now
To sensual Appetite, who from beneath
Usurping over soverign Reason claimed
Superior sway: from thus distempered breast,

Adam, estranged in look and altered stile,
Speech intermittent thus to Eve renewed.



Would thou had hearkened to my words, and stayed
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
Desire of wandering this unhappy Morn,
I know not whence possessed thee; we had then
Remained still happy, not as now, despoiled
Of all our good, shamed, naked, miserable.
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve
The Faith they owe; when earnestly they seek
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail.



To whom soon moved with touch of blame thus Eve.


 What words have past thy Lips, Adam
severe,
Imput'st thou that to my default, or will
Of wandering, as thou call it, which who knows
But might as ill have happened thou being by,
Or to thy self perhaps: had thou been there,
Or here the attempt, thou could not have discerned
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake;
No ground of enmity between us known,
Why he should mean me ill, or seek to harm.
Was I to have never parted from thy side?
As good have grown there still a lifeless Rib.
Being as I am, why did not thou the Head
Command me absolutely not to go,
Going into such danger as thou said?
Too facile then thou did not much gainsay,
Nay did permit, approve, and fair dismiss.
Had thou bin firm and fixed in thy dissent,
Neither had I transgressed, nor thou with me.



To whom then first incensed Adam replied,

 Is this the Love, is this the
recompense
Of mine to thee, ungrateful Eve, expressed
Immutable when thou were lost, not I,
Who might have lived and joyed immortal bliss,
Yet willingly chose rather Death with thee:
And am I now upbraided, as the cause
Of thy transgressing? not enough severe,
It seems, in thy restraint: what could I more?
I warned thee, I admonished thee, foretold
The danger, and the lurking Enemy
That lay in wait; beyond this had bin force,
And force upon free will hath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on, secure
Either to meet no danger, or to find
Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps

I also erred in overmuch admiring
What seemed in thee so perfect, that I thought
No evil dared attempt thee, but I rue
That error now, which is become my crime,
And thou the Accuser.  Thus it shall befall
Him who to worth in Women overtrusting
Lets her will rule; restraint she will not brook,
And left to her self, if evil thence ensue,
She first his weak indulgence will accuse.



Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning,
And of their vain contest appeared no end.
The End of the Ninth Book.

