.



So spake our general Mother, and with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreproved,
And meek surrender, half embracing leant 

On our first Father, half her swelling Breast
Naked met his under the flowing Gold
Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
Both of her Beauty and submissive Charms
Smiled with superior Love, as Jupiter

On Juno smiles, when he impregns the Clouds
That shed May Flowers; and pressed her Matron lip
With kisses pure: aside the Devil turned
For envy, yet with jealous leer malign
Eyed them askance, and to himself thus plaint.



Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two
Imparadised in one another arms
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill
Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still unfulfilled with pain of longing pines;
Yet let me not forget what I have gained
From their own mouths; all is not theirs it seems:
One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge called,
Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidden?
Suspicious, reasonless.  Why should their Lord
Envy them that? can it be sin to know,
Can it be death? and do they only stand
By Ignorance, is that their happy state,
The proof of their obedience and their faith?
O fair foundation laid whereon to build
Their ruin! Hence I will excite their minds
With more desire to know, and to reject
Envious commands, invented with design
To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt
Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such,
They taste and die: what likelier can ensue?
But first with narrow search I must walk round 


This Garden, and no corner leave unspi'd;
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
Some wandering Spirit of Heaven, by Fountain side,
Or in thick shade retired, from him to draw
What further would be learnt.  Live while ye may,
Yet happy pair; enjoy, till I return,
Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed.



So saying, his proud step he scornful turned,
But with sly circumspection, and began
Through wood, through waste, o'er hill, o'er dale his roam.
Mean while in utmost Longitude, where Heaven
With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun
Slowly descended, and with right aspect
Against the eastern Gate of Paradise

Leveled his evening Rays: it was a Rock
Of Alabaster, piled up to the Clouds,
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent
Accessible from Earth, one entrance high;
The rest was craggy cliff, that overhung
Still as it rose, impossible to climb.
Betwixt these rocky Pillars Gabriel sat
Chief of the Angelic Guards, awaiting night;
About him exercised Heroic Games
The unarmed Youth of Heaven, but nigh at hand
Celestial Armoury, Shields, Helmes, and Spears,
Hung high with Diamond flaming, and with Gold.
Thither came Uriel, gliding through the Even
On a Sun beam, swift as a shooting Star
In Autumn thwarts the night, when vapors fired
Impress the Air, and shows the Mariner
From what point of his Compass to beware
Impetuous winds: he thus began in haste.




Gabriel, to thee thy course by Lot hath given
Charge and strict watch that to this happy Place 

No evil thing approach or enter in;
This day at height of Noon came to my Sphere
A Spirit, zealous, as he seemed, to know
More of the Almighty's works, and chiefly Man
Gods latest Image: I described his way
Bent all on speed, and marked his Aerie Gate;
But in the Mount that lies from Eden North,
Where he first lighted, soon discerned his looks
Alien from Heaven, with passions foul obscured:
Mine eye pursued him still, but under shade
Lost sight of him; one of the banished crew
I fear, hath ventured from the deep, to raise
New troubles; him thy care must be to find.



To whom the winged Warrior thus returned:


Uriel, no wonder if thy perfect sight,
Amid the Suns bright circle where thou sits,
See far and wide: in at this Gate none pass
The vigilance here placed, but such as come
Well known from Heaven; and since Meridian hour
No Creature thence: if Spirit of other sort,
So minded, have over leapt these earthy bounds
On purpose, hard thou know it to exclude
Spiritual substance with corporeal barr.
But if within the circuit of these walks,
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom
Thou tells, by morrow dawning I shall know.



So promised he, and Uriel to his charge
Returned on that bright beam, whose point now raised
Bore him slope downward to the Sun now fallen
Beneath theAzores; whither the prime Orb,
Incredible how swift, had thither rolled
Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth
By shorter flight to the East, had left him there
Arraying with reflected Purple and Gold 
some copies have '101'


The Clouds that on his West