hy Senses then
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forgo,
To what thou has, and for the Air of youth
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy Spirits down, and last consume
The Balm of Life.  To whom our
Ancestor.



Henceforth I fly not Death, nor would prolong
Life much, bent rather how I may be quit

Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge,
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendering up, and patiently attend
My dissolution. 
Michael replied.




 Nor love thy Life, nor hate;
but what thou  lives
Live well, how long or short permit to Heaven:
And now prepare thee for another sight.



He looked and saw a spacious Plain, whereon
Were Tents of various hue; by some were herds
Of Cattle grazing: others, whence the sound
Of Instruments that made melodious chime
Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moved
Their stops and chords was seen: his volant touch
Instinct through all proportions low and high
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who at the Forge
Labouring, two massy clods of Iron and Brass     
Had melted (whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on Mountain or in Vale,
Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot
To some Caves mouth, or whether washed by stream
From underground) the liquid Ore he dreind
Into fit moulds prepared; from which he formed
First his own Tools; then, what might else be wrought
Fusil or graven in mettle.  After these,
But on the hither side a different sort
From the high neighbouring Hills, which was their Seat,
Down to the Plain descended: by their guise
Just men they seemed, and all their study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid, nor those things last which might preserve
Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain
Long had not walked, when from the Tents behold
A Heavy of fair Women, richly gay

In Gems and wanton dress; to the Harp they sung
Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on:
The Men though grave, eyed them, and let their eyes
Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net
Fast caught, they liked, and each his liking chose;
And now of love they treat till th'Eevning Star
Loves Harbinger appeared; then all in heat
They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke

Hymen, then first to marriage Rites invoked;
With Feast and Music all the Tents resound.
Such happy interview and fair event
Of love and youth not lost, Songs, Garlands, Flours,
And charming Symphonies attached the heart
Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight,
The bent of Nature; which he thus expressed.



True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blessed,
Much better seems this Vision, and more hope
Of peaceful days portends, then those two past;
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse,
Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends.



To whom thus Michael.
Judge not what is best
By pleasure, though to Nature seeming meet,
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holy and pure, conformity divine.
Those Tents thou saw so pleasant, were the Tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his Race
Who slew his Brother; studious they appear
Of Arts that polish Life, Inventors rare,
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledged none.
Yet they a beauteous offspring shall beget;
For that fair female Troop thou saw, that seemed
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists

Women's domestic honour and chief praise;
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troule the Tongue, and roll the Eye.
To these that sober Race of Men, whose lives
Religious titl'd them the Sons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
Of these fair Atheists, and now swim in joy,
(Erelong to swim at large) and laugh; for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weep.



To whom thus Adam of short joy bereft.

 O pity and shame, that 