
By us? who rather double honour gain
From his surmise proved false, find peace within,
Favour from Heaven, our witness from The event.
And what is Faith, Love, Virtue unassaid
Alone, without exterior help sustained?
Let us not then suspect our happy State
Left so imperfect by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single or combined.
Frail is our happiness, if this be so,
And Eden were no Eden thus exposed.



To whom thus Adam fervently replied.

 O Woman, best are all things as the
will
Of God ordained them, his creating hand
Nothing imperfect or deficient left
Of all that he Created, much less Man,
Or aught that might his happy State secure,
Secure from outward force; within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receive no harm.
But God left free the Will, for what obeys
Reason, is free, and Reason he made right,
But bid her well beware, and still erect,
Least by some fair appearing good surprised
She dictate false, and misinform the Will
To do what God expressly hath forbid,
Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoins,
That I should mind thee oft, and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve,
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the Foe suborned,


And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
Were better, and most likely if from me
Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
Would thou approve thy constancy, approve
First thy obedience; the other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But if thou think, trial unsought may find
Us both securer then thus warned thou seem,
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more;
Go in thy native innocence, rely
On what thou has of virtue, summon all,
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.



So spake the Patriarch of Mankind, but Eve

Persisted, yet submiss, though last, replied.



With thy permission then, and thus forewarned
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touched only, that our trial, when least sought,
May find us both perhaps far less prepared,
The willinger I go, nor much expect
A Foe so proud will first the weaker seek;
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.

 Thus saying, from her Husbands hand
her hand
Soft she withdrew, and like a Wood-Nymph light

Oread or Dryad, or 
of Delia's Train,
Betook her to the Groves, but Delia's self
In gate surpassed and Goddess-like deport,
Though not as she with Bow and Quiver armed,
But with such Gardening Tools as Art yet rude,
Guiltless of fire had formed, or Angels brought.
To Pales, or Pomona thus adorned,
Likeliest she seemed, Pomona when she fled

Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her Prime,

Yet Virgin of Proserpina from Jove.
Her long with ardent look his Eye pursued
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Oft he to her his charge of quick return
Repeated, she to him as oft engaged
To be returned by Noon amid the Bower,
And all things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or Afternoons repose.
O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve,
Of thy presumed return! event perverse!
Thou never from that hour in Paradise

Foundst either sweet repast, or sound repose;
Such ambush hid among sweet Flours and Shades
To intercept thy way, or send thee back
Despoiled of Innocence, of Faith, of Bliss.
For now, and since first break of dawn the Fiend,
Mere Serpent in appearance, forth was come,
And on his Quest, where likeliest he might find
The only two of Mankind, but in them
The whole included Race, his purposed prey.
In Bower and Field he sought, where any tuft
Of Grove or Garden-Plot more pleasant lay,
Their tendency or Plantation for delight,
By Fountain or by shady Rivulet
He sought them both, but wished his hap might find

Eve separate, he wished, but not with hope
Of what so seldom chanced, when to his wish,
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies,
Veiled in a Cloud of Fragrance, where she stood,
Half spied, so thick the Roses bushing round
About her glowd, oft stooping to support
Each Flour of slender stalk, whose head though gay
Carnation, Purple, Azure, or spect with Gold,


Hung drooping unsustaind, them she upstaies
Gently with Myrtle band, mindless the while,
Her self, though fairest unsupported Flour,
From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh.
Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed
Of stateliest Covert, Cedar, Pine, or Palm,
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen
Among thick-wov'n Arborets and Flours
Imborderd on each Bank, the hand of Eve:
Spot more delicious then those Gardens feigned
Or of revived Atones, or renowned

Alcinous, host of old Laertes Son,
Or that, not Mystic, where the Sapient King
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian Spouse.
Much he the Place admired, the Person more.
As one who long in populous City pent,
Where Houses thick and Sewers annoy the Air,
Forth issuing on a Summers Morn to breathe
Among the pleasant Villages and Farms
Adjoynd, from each thing met conceives delight,
The smell of Grain, or tedded Grass, or Kine,
Or Dairy, each rural sight, each rural sound;
If chance with Nymphlike step fair Virgin pass,
What pleasing seemed, for her now pleases more,
She most, and in her look sums all Delight.
Such Pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This