 next upstood

Nisroc, of Principalities the prime;
As one he stood escaped from cruel fight,
Sore toiled, his riven Arms to havoc hewn,
And cloudy in aspect thus answering spake.

 Deliverer from new Lords, leader
to free
Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard
For Gods, and too unequal work we find
Against unequal arms to fight in pain,
Against unpaind, impassive; from which evil
Ruin must needs ensue; for what avails
Valour or strength, though matchless, quelled with pain
Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands
Of Mightiest.  Sense of pleasure we may well
Spare out of life perhaps, and not rapine,
But live content, which is the calmest life:
But pain is perfect misery, the worst
Of evils, and excessive, overturns
All patience.  He who therefore can invent
With what more forcible we may offend
Our yet unwonted Enemies, or arm
Our selves with like defence, to me deserves
No less then for deliverance what we owe.



Where to with look composed Satan replied.
 Not uninvented that, which thou aright
Believst so main to our success, I bring;
Which of us who beholds the bright surface
Of this Ethereous mould whereon we stand,
This continent of spacious Heaven, adorned
With Plant, Fruit, Flour Ambrosial, Gems & Gold,

Whose Eye so superficially surveys
These things, as not to mind from whence they grow
Deep under ground, materials dark and crude,
Of spirituous and fiery spume, till touched
With Heavens ray, and tempered they shoot forth
So beauteous, opening to the ambient light.
These in their dark Nativity the Deep
Shall yield us pregnant with infernal flame,
Which into hallow Engines long and round
Thick-rammd, at the other bore with touch of fire
Dilated and infuriate shall send forth
From far with thundering noise among our foes
Such implements of mischief as shall dash
To pieces, and overwhelm whatever stands
Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmed
The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt.
Nor long shall be our labour, yet ere dawn,
Effect shall end our wish.  Mean while revive;
Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joint
Think nothing hard, much less to be despaired.

 He ended, and his words their
drooping chere
Enlightened, and their languished hope revived.
Th'invention all admired, and each, how he
To be th'inventer missed, so easy it seemed
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought
Impossible: yet happily of thy Race
In future days, if Malice should abound,
Some one intent on mischief, or inspired
With devilish machination might devise
Like instrument to plague the Sons of men
For sin, on war and mutual slaughter bent.
Forthwith from Council to the work they flew,
None arguing stood, innumerable hands
Were ready, in a moment up they turned


Wide the Celestial soil, and saw beneath
Th'originals of Nature in their crude
Conception; Sulphurous and Nitrous Foam
They found, they mingled, and with subtle Art,
Concocted and adusted they reduced
To blackest grain, and into store conveyed:
Part hidden veins digged up (nor hath this Earth
Entrails unlike) of Mineral and Stone,
Whereof to found their Engines and their Balls
Of missive ruin; part incentive reed
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire.
So all ere day-spring, under conscious Night
Secret they finished, and in order set,
With silent circumspection unespied.
Now when fair Morn Orient in Heaven appeared
Up rose the Victor Angels, and to Arms
The matin Trumpet Sung: in Arms they stood
Of Golden Panoply, refulgent Host,
Soon banded; others from the dawning Hills
Looked round, and Scouts each Coast light-armed scour,
Each quarter, to descry the distant foe,
Where lodged, or whither fled, or if for fight,
In motion or in alt: him soon they met
Under spread Ensigns moving nigh, in slow
But firm Battalion; back with speediest Sail

Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing,
Came flying, and in mid Air aloud thus cried.



Arm, Warriors, Arm for fight, the foe at hand,
Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit
This day, fear not his flight; so thick a Cloud
He comes, and settled in 