tterable, and worse
Than Fables yet have feigned, or fear conceived,

Gorgons and Hydra's, and 
Chimera's dire.


Mean while the Adversary of God and Man,

Satan with thoughts inflamed of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and towards the Gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight; some times
He scours the right hand coast, some times the left,
Now shaves with level wing the Deep, then soars
Up to the fiery Concave touring high.
As when far off at Sea a Fleet descried
Hangs in the Clouds, by ??quinoctial Winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the Isles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence Merchants bring
Their spicie Drugs: they on the Trading Flood
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape
Ply stemming nightly toward the Pole.  So seemed
Far off the flying Fiend: at last appear
Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof, 

And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass,
Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock,
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire,
Yet unconsumed.  Before the Gates there sat
On either side a formidable shape;
The one seemed Woman to the waste, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fouled
Voluminous and vast, a Serpent armed
With mortal sting: about her middle round
A cry of Hell Hounds never ceasing barked
With wide Cerberian mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous Peal: yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb,
And kennel there, yet there still barked and howled,
Within unseen.  Far less abhorred than these
Vexed Scylla bathing in the Sea that parts

Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore:
Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when called
In secret, riding through the Air she comes
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland Witches, while the labouring Moon
Eclipses at their charms.  The other shape,
If shape it might be called that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb,
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed either; black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful Dart; what seemed his head
The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on.

Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The Monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode.
The undaunted Fiend what this might be admired, Admired, not feared;
God and his Son except, 

Created thing nought valued he nor shunned;
And with disdainful look thus first began.



Whence and what art thou, execrable shape,
That dare, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated Front athwart my way
To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee:
Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven.



To whom the Goblin full of wrath replied,

Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and Faith, till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious Arms
Drew after him the third part of Heavens Sons
Conjured against the highest, for which both Thou
And they outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste Eternal days  some copies have days  in woe and pain?
And reckons thou thy self with Spirits of Heaven,
Hell-doomed, and breath defiance here and scorn
Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more,
Thy King and Lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings,
Least with a whip of Scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this Dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before.



So spake the grisly terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold
More dreadful and deform: on the other side
Incensed  some copies have Licenced with indignation Satan stood
Unterrifi'd, and like a Comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiucus huge
In the Arctic Sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes Pestilence and War. Each at the Head
Leveled his deadly aim; their fatal hands 


No second stroke intend, and such a frown
Each cast at the other, as when two black Clouds
With Heavens Artillery fraught, come rattling on
Over the Caspian, then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till Winds the signal blow
To join their dark Encounter in mid air:
So frowned the mighty Combatants, that Hell
Grew darker at their frown, so matched they stood;
For never but once more was either like
To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds
Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the Snaky Sorceress that sat
Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between.



O Father, what intends thy hand, 
she  cried,

Against thy only Son? What fury O Son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart
Against thy Fathers head? and 