ll the gathered beach
They fastened, and the Mole immense wrought on
Over the foaming deep high Arched, a Bridge
Of length prodigious joining to the Wall
Immovable of this now fenceless world
Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad,
Smooth, easy, inoffensive down to Hell.
So, if great things to small may be compared,

Xerxes, the Liberty of Greece to yoke,
From Suss his Memnonian Palace high
Came to the Sea, and over Hellespont

Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joined,
And scourged with many a stroke th'indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock
Over the vexed Abyss, following the track
Of Satan, to the self same place where he
First lighted from his Wing, and landed safe
From out of Chaos to the out side bare
Of this round World: with Pins of Adamant
And Chains they made all fast, too fast they made
And durable; and now in little space


The confines met of Empyrean Heaven
And of this World, and on the left hand Hell
With long reach interposed; three several ways
In sight, to each of these three places led.
And now their way to Earth they had descried,
To Paradise first tending, when behold

Satan in likeness of an Angel bright
Betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion steering
His Zenith, while the Sun in Aries
rose:
Disguised he came, but those his Children dear
Their Parent soon discerned, though in disguise.
He after Eve seduced, unminded slunk
Into the Wood fast by, and changing shape
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act
By Eve, though all unwitting, seconded
Upon her Husband, saw their shame that sought
Vain covertures; but when he saw descend
The Son of God to judge them terrified
He fled, not hoping to escape, but shun
The present, fearing guilty what his wrath
Might suddenly inflict; that past, returned
By Night, and listening where the hapless Pair
Sate in their sad discourse, and various plaint,
Thence gathered his own doom, which understood
Not instant, but of future time.  With joy
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now returned,
And at the brink of Chaos, near the foot
Of this new wondrous Pontifice, unhop't
Met who to meet him came, his Offspring dear.
Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight
Of that stupendous Bridge his joy increased.
Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair
Enchanting Daughter, thus the silence broke.





O Parent, these are thy magnificant deeds,  

Thy Trophies, which thou view as not thine own,
Thou art their Author and prime Architect:
For I no sooner in my Heart divined,
My Heart, which by a secret harmony
Still moves with thine, joined in connexion sweet,
That thou on Earth had prospered, which thy looks
Now also evidence, but straight I felt
Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt
That I must after thee with this thy Son;
Such fatal consequence unites us three:
Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure
Detain from following thy illustrious track.
Thou has achieved our liberty, confined
Within Hell Gates till, now, thou us impow'rd
To fortify thus far, and overlay
With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyss.
Thine now is all this World, thy virtue hath won
What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gained
With odds what War hath lost, and fully avenged
Our foil in Heaven; here thou shalt Monarch reign,
There did not; there let him still Victor sway,
As Battle hath adjudged, from this new World
Retiring, by his own doom alienated,
And henceforth Monarchy with thee divide
Of all things parted by the Empyreal bounds,
His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World,
Or try thee now more dangerous to his Throne.



Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answered glad.

 Fair Daughter, and thou Son and
Grandchild both,
High proof ye now have given to be the Race
Of Satan (for I glory in the name,
Antagonist of Heavens Almighty King)


Amply have merited of me, of all
The infernal Empire, that so near Heavens door
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
Mine with this glorious Work, and made one Realm
Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent
Of easy thorough-fare.  Therefore while I
Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
With these successes, and with them rejoice,
You two this way, among these numerous Orbs
All yours, right down to Paradise descend;
There dwell and Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth
Dominion exercise and in the Air,
Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declared,
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.
My Substitutes I send ye, and Create
Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might
Issuing from me: on your joint vigour now
My hold of this new Kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit.
If your joint power prevails, th'affaires of Hell
No detriment need fear, go and be strong.



So saying he dismissed them, they with speed
Their course through thickest Constellations held
Spreading their bane; the blasted Stars looked wan,
And Planets, Planet-str