sound of Seas,
Through multitude that sung: 
Just are thy  ways,
Righteous are thy Decrees on all thy Works;
Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son,
Destined restorer of Mankind, by whom
New Heaven and Earth shall to the Ages rise,
Or down from Heaven descend.  Such
was their song,
While the Creator calling forth by name
His mighty Angels gave them several charge,
As sorted best with present things.  The Sun
Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
As might affect the Earth with cold and heat
Scarce tolerable, and from the North to call
Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring
Solstitial summers heat.  To the blanc Moon
Her office they prescribed, to the other five
Their planetary motions and aspects
In Sextile, Square, 
and Trine, and                                  
                
Opposite,

Of noxious efficacy, and when to join
In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixed
Their influence malignant when to shower,
Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling,
Should prove tempestuous: To the Winds they set
Their corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, Air, and Shore, the Thunder when to roll
With terror through the dark Aerial Hall.
Some say he bid his Angels turn askance
The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more
From the Suns Axle; they with labour pushed
Oblique the Centres Globe: Some say the Sun
Was bid turn Reins from th'Equinoctial Rode
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the Seven

Atlantic Sisters, and the Spartan Twins
Up to the Tropic
Crab;  thence
down amain
By Leo and the Virgin and the Scales,
As deep as Capricorn, to bring in change
Of Seasons to each Clime; else had the Spring
Perpetual smiled on Earth with vernant Flours,
Equal in Days and Nights, except to those
Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day
Had unbenighted shone, while the low Sun
To recompense his distance, in their sight
Had rounded still theHorizon, and not  known
Or East or West, which had forbid the Snow
From cold Estotiland, and South as far
Beneath Magellan.  At that tasted Fruit
The Sun, as from Thyestean Banquet, turned
His course intended; else how had the World
Inhabited, though sunless, more then now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat?
These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced
Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast,

Vapour, and Mist, and Exhalation hot,
Corrupt and Pestilent: Now from the North
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore
Bursting their brazen Dungeon, armed with ice
And snow and hail and stormy gust and flaw,

Bores and C??cias and Argestes
loud
And Thrascias rend the Woods and Seas upturn;
With adverse blast upturns them from the South

Notus and Afer black with thundrous Clouds
From Serraliona; thwart of these as fierce
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent Winds

Eurus and Zephir with their lateral noise,

Sirocco, and Libecchio, Thus began
Outrage from lifeless things; but Discord first
Daughter of Sin, among th'irrational,
Death introduced through fierce antipathy:
Beast now with Beast began war, and Foul with Foul,
And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving,
Devoured each other; nor stood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him, or with countenance grim
Glared on him passing: these were from without
The growing miseries, which Adam saw
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within,
And in a troubled Sea of passion tossed,
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint.



O miserable of happy! is this the end
Of this new glorious World, and me so late
The Glory of that Glory, who now become
Accursed of blessed, hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my height
Of happiness: yet well, if here would end
The misery, I deserved it, and would bear
My own deservings; but this will not serve;


All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated curse.  O voice once heard
Delightfully, 
Increase and  multiply,

 Now death to hear! for what can I
increase
Or multiply, but curses on my head?
Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My Head,  Ill fare our
Ancestor impure,
For this we may thank Adam;

but his thanks
Shall be the execration; so besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me
Shall with a fierce reflux on me redound,
On me as on their natural center light
Heavy, though in their place.  O fleeting joys
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay
To mould me Man, did I solicit thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious Garden? as my Will
Concurred not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust,
Desirous to resign, and render back
All I received, unable to perform
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not.  To the loss of that,
Sufficient penalty, why has thou added
The sense of endless woes? inexplicable
Thy justice seems; yet to say truth, too late,
I thus contest; then should have been refused
Those terms whatever, when they we