esus son of Mary second Eve,
Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heaven,


Prince of the Air; then rising from his Grave
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumph
In open show, and with ascention bright
Captivity led captive through the Air,
The Realm it self of Satan long usurped,
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet;
Even he who now foretold his fatal bruise,
And to the Woman thus his Sentence turned.





Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will
Thine shall submit, he over thee shall rule.



On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced.

 Because thou has hearkened to the
voice of thy  Wife,
And eaten of the Tree concerning which
I charged thee, saying: Thou shalt not eat thereof,
Cursed is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof all the days of thy Life;
Thorns also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid, and thou shalt eat th'Herb of th'Field,
In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eat Bread,
Till thou return unto the ground, for thou
Out of the ground was taken, know thy Birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.



So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent,
And th'instant stroke of Death denounced that day
Removed far off; then pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume,
As when he washed his servants feet so now
As Father of his Family he clad
Their nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain,
Or as the Snake with youthful Coat repaid;

And thought not much to cloth his Enemies:
Nor he their outward only with the Skins
Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more
Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness,
Arraying covered from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returned,
Into his blissful bosom reassumed
In glory as of old, to him appeased
All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Meanwhile ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth,
Within the Gates of Hell sate Sin and Death,
In counterview within the Gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through,
Sin opening, who thus now to Death began.



O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idly, while Satan our great Author thrives
In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides
For us his offspring dear; It cannot be
But that success attends him; if mishap,
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven
By his Avenger, since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and Dominion given me large
Beyond this Deep; whatever draws me on,
Or sympathy, or some connatural force
Powerful at greatest distance to unite
With secret amity things of like kind
By secretest conveyance.  Thou my Shade
Inseparable must with me along:
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But least the difficulty of passing back


Stay his return perhaps over this Gulf
Impassable, Impervious, let us try
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this Maine from Hell to that new World
Where Satan now prevails, a Monument
Of merit high to all the infernal Host,
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse,
Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead.
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
By this new felt attraction and instinct.



Whom thus the meagre Shadow answered soon.

 Go whither Fate and inclination
strong
Leads thee, I shall not lag behind, nor err
The way, thou leading, such a sent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste
The savour of Death from all things there that live:
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid.



So saying, with delight he snuffed the smell
Of mortal change on Earth.  As when a flock
Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote,
Against the day of Battle, to a Field,
Where Armies lie encamped, come flying, lured
With sent of living Carcasses designed
For death, the following day, in bloody fight.
So scented the grim Feature, and upturned
His Nostril wide into the murkie Air,
Sagacious of his Quarry from so far.
Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waste
Wide Anarchy of Chaos damp and dark
Flew divers, and with Power (their Power was great)
Hovering upon the Waters; what they met
Solid or slimy, as in raging Sea

Tossed up and down, together crowded drove
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell.
As when two Polar Winds blowing adverse
Upon the Cronian Sea, together drive
Mountains of Ice, that stop th'imagin'd way
Beyond Petsora Eastward, to the rich

Cathaian Coast. The aggregated Soil
Death with his Mace petrific, cold and dry,
As with a Trident smote, and fixed as firm
As Delos floating once; the rest his look
Bound with Gorgonian rigour not to move,
And with Asphaltic slime; broad as the 
Gate,
Deep to the Roots of He