pious War in Heaven and Battle proud
With vain attempt.  Him the Almighty Power
Hurled headlong flaming from the Ethereal Sky
With hideous ruin and combustion down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell

In Adamantine Chains and penal Fire,
Who dared defy the Omnipotent to Arms.
Nine times the Space that measures Day and Night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery Gulf
Confounded though immortal: But his doom
Reserved him to more wrath; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him; round he throws his baleful eyes
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate:
At once as far as Angels ken he views
The dismal Situation waste and wilde,
A Dungeon horrible, on all sides round
As one great Furnace flamed, yet from those flames
No light, but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery Deluge, fed
With ever-burning Sulphur unconsumed:
Such place Eternal Justice had prepared
For those rebellious, here their some copies  print
their  Prison ordained
In utter darkness, and their portion set
As far removed from God and light of Heaven
As from the Center thrice to the utmost Pole.
O how unlike the place from whence they fell!
There the companions of his fall, overwhelmed
With Floods and Whirlwinds of tempestuous fire,
He soon discerns, and weltering by his side
One next himself in power, and next in crime,
Long after known in Palestine, and named

Beelzebub.  To whom the Arch-Enemy,


And thence in Heaven called Satan, with bold  words
Breaking the horrid silence thus began.





If thou be he; But O how fallen! how changed
From him, who in the happy Realms of Light
Clothed with transcendent brightness did out-shine
Myriads though bright: If he whom mutual league,
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope
And hazard in the Glorious Enterprise,
Joined with me once, now misery hath joined
In equal ruin: into what Pit thou see
From what height fallen, so much the stronger proved
He with his Thunder: and till then who knew
The force of those dire Arms?  yet not for those,
Nor what the Potent Victor in his rage
Can else inflict, do I repent or change,
Though changed in outward lustre; that fixed mind
And high disdain, from sense of injured merit,
That with the mightiest raised me to contend,
And to the fierce contention brought along
Innumerable force of Spirits armed
That dared dislike his reign, and me preferring,
His utmost power with adverse power opposed
In dubious Battle on the Plains of Heaven,
And shook his throne.  What though the field be lost?
All is not lost; the unconquerable Will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield:
And what is else not to be overcome?
That Glory never shall his wrath or might
Extort from me.  To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, and deify his power,
Who from the terror of this Arm so late
Doubted his Empire, that were low indeed,
That were an ignominy and shame beneath

This downfall; since by Fate the strength of Gods
And this Imperial substance cannot fail,
Since through experience of this great event
In Arms not worse, in foresight much advanced,
We may with more successful hope resolve
To wage by force or guile eternal War
Irreconcilable, to our grand Foe,
Who now triumphs, and in the excess of joy
Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heaven.





So spake the Apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but racked wit