his face I see
Sad resolution and secure: let each
His Adamantine coat gird well, and each
Fit well his Helm, gripe fast his orbit Shield,

Born even or high, for this day will pour down,
If I conjecture aught, no drizzling shower,
But rattling storm of Arrows barbed with fire.

 So warned he them aware
themselves, and soon
In order, quit of all impediment;
Instant without disturb they took Alarm,
And onward move Embattled; when behold
Not distant far with heavy pace the Foe
Approaching gross and huge; in hollow Cube
Training his devilish Enginrie, impaled
On every side with shadowing Squadrons Deep,
To hide the fraud.  At interview both stood
A while, but suddenly at head appeared

Satan: And thus was heard Commanding loud.



Vanguard, to Right and Left the Front unfold;
That all may see who hate us, how we seek
Peace and composure, and with open breast
Stand ready to receive them, if they like
Our overture, and turn not back perverse;
But that I doubt, however witness Heaven,
Heaven witness thou anon, while we discharge
Freely our part; ye who appointed stand
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch
What we propound, and loud that all may hear.



So scoffing in ambiguous words he scarce,
Had ended; when to Right and Left the Front
Divided, and to either Flank retired.
Which to our eyes discovered new and strange,
A triple mounted row of Pillars laid
On Wheels (for like to Pillars most they seemed
Or hollowed bodies made of Oak or Fur
With branches lopped, in Wood or Mountain felled)
Brass, Iron, Stony mould, had not their mouths
With hideous orifice gaped on us wide,


Portending hollow truce; at each behind
A Seraph stood, and in his hand a Reed
Stood waving tipped with fire; while we suspense,
Collected stood within our thoughts amused,
Not long, for sudden all at once their Reeds
Put forth, and to a narrow vent applied
With nicest touch.  Immediate in a flame,
But soon obscured with smoke, all Heaven appeared,
From those deep throated Engines belched, whose roar
Emboweld with outrageous noise the Air,
And all her entrails tore, disgorging foul
Their devilish glut, chained Thunderbolts and Hail
Of Iron Globes, which on the Victor Host
Levelled, with such impetuous fury smote,
That whom they hit, none on their feet might stand,
Though standing else as Rocks, but down they fell
By thousands, Angel on Arch-Angel rolled;
The sooner for their Arms, unarmed they might
Have easily as Spirits evaded swift
By quick contraction or remove; but now
Foul dissipation followed and forced rout;
Nor served it to relax their serried files.
What should they do? if on they rushed, repulse
Repeated, and indecent overthrow
Doubled, would render them yet more despised,
And to their foes a laughter; for in view
Stood ranked of Seraphim another row
In posture to displode their second tire
Of Thunder: back defeated to return
They worse abhorred.  Satan beheld their plight,
And to his Mates thus in derision ca11'd.



O Friends, why come not on these Victors proud?
Ere while they fierce were coming, and when wee,
To entertain them fair with open Front

And Breast, (what could we more?) propounded terms
Of composition, strait they changed their minds,
Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell,
As they would dance, yet for a dance they seemed
Somewhat extravagant and wilde, perhaps
For joy of offered peace: but I suppose
If our proposals once again were heard
We should compel them to a quick result.



To whom thus Belial in like gamesom  mood,

 Leader, the terms we sent were
terms of weight,
Of hard contents, and full of force urged home,
Such as we might perceive amused them all,
And stumbled many, who receives them right,
Had need from head to foot well understand;
Not understood, this gift they have besides,
They show us when our foes walk not upright.



So they among themselves in pleasant vein
Stood scoffing, heightened in their thoughts beyond
All doubt of Victory, eternal might
To match with their inventions they presumed
So easy, and of his Thunder made a scorn,
And all hi