nd to escape his punishment.
So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrath,
Which thou incurs by flying, meet thy flight
seven fold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provoked.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them
Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they
Less hardy to endure? courageous Chief,
The first in flight from pain, had thou alleged
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely had not come sole fugitive. 



To which the Fiend thus answered frowning stern.

Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel, well thou know I stood
Thy fiercest, when in Battle to thy aide
Thy blasting volleyed Thunder made all speed
And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear.
But still thy words at random, as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behoves
From hard assays and ill successes past
A faithful Leader, not to hazard all
Through ways of danger by himself untried.
I therefore, I alone first undertook 


To wing the desolate Abyss, and spy
This new created World, whereof in Hell
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on Earth, or in mid Air;
Though for possession put to try once more
What thou and thy gay Legions dare against;
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his Throne,
And practised distances to cringe, not fight.



To whom the warrior Angel, soon replied.

To say and strait unsay, pretending first
Wise to fly pain, professing next the Spy,
Argues no Leader but a liar traced,

Satan, and could thou faithful add?  O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head;
Was this your discipline and faith engaged,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegiance to the acknowldged Power supreme?
And thou sly hypocrite, who now would seem
Patron of liberty, who more then thou
Once fawned, and cringed, and servilly adored
Heavens awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope
To dispossess him, and thy self to reign?
But mark what I arreede thee now, avaunt;
Fly thither whence thou fled: if from this hour
Within these hallowed limits thou appear,
Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chained,
And Seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
The facile gates of hell too slightly barred. 



So threatened he, but Satan to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied. 




Then when I am thy captive talk of chains,
Proud limitarie Cherub, but ere then
Far heavier load thy self expect to feel
From my prevailing arm, though Heavens King
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers,
Used to the yoke, draw his triumphant wheels
In progress through the rode of Heaven Star-paved.



While thus he spake, the Angelic Squadron bright
Turned fiery red, sharpening in mooned horns
Their Phalanx, and began to hemm him round
With ported Spears, as thick as when a field
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind
Sways them; the careful Ploughmen doubting stands
Least on the threshing floor his hopeful sheaves
Prove chaff. On the other side Satan alarmed
Collecting all his might dilated stood,
Like Teneriff or Atlas unremoved:
His stature reached the Sky, and on his Crest
Sat horror Plumed; nor wanted in his grasp
What seemed both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise

In this commotion, but the Starry Cope
Of Heaven perhaps, or all the Elements
At least had gon to rack, disturbed and torn
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
the Eternal to prevent such horrid fray
Hung forth in Heaven his golden Scales, yet seen
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign,
Wherein all things created first he weight,
The pendulous round Earth with balanced Air
In counterpoised, now ponders all events,
Battles and Realms: in these he put two weights
The sequel each of parting and of fight; 


The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam;
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespoke the Fiend.




Satan, I know thy strength, and thou know  mine,
Neither our own but given; what folly then
To boast what Arms can doe, since thine no more
Then Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubled now
To trample thee as mire: for proof look up,
And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist.   The Fiend looked up
and knew
His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.
The End of the Fourth Book.

