re proposed:
Thou did accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil the conditions? and though God
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son
Prove disobedient, and reproved, retort,

Wherefore did thou beget me? I sought it not:
Would thou admit for his contempt of thee
That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,
But Natural necessity begot.
God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
To serve him, thy reward was of his grace,
Thy punishment then justly is at his Will.
Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair,
That dust I am, and shall to dust return:
O welcome hour whenever! why delays
His hand to execute what his Decree
Fixed on this day? why do I overlive,
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out
To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet
Mortality my sentence, and be Earth
Insensible, how glad would lay me down
As in my Mothers lap? there I should rest
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more
Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse
To me and to my offspring would torment me
With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, least all I cannot die,
Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man
Which God inspired, cannot together perish
With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave,
Or in some other dismal place who knows
But I shall die a living Death? O thought
Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath
Of Life that sinned; what dies but what had life
And sin? the Body properly hath neither.
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since humane reach no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrath also? be it, man is not so,


But mortal doomed.  How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end?
Can he make deathless Death? that were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held, as Argument
Of weakness, not of Power.  Will he, draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite
In punished man, to satisfy his rigour
Satisfied never; that were to extend
His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law,
By which all Causes else according still
To the reception of their matter act,
Not to th'extent of their own Sphere.  But say
That Death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
Bereaving sense, but endless misery
From this day onward, which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me, and so last
To perpetuity; Ay me, that fear
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
On my defenceless head; both Death and I
Am found Eternal, and incorporate both,
Nor I on my part single, in me all
Posterity stands cursed: Fair Patrimony
That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able
To waste it all my self, and leave ye none!
So disinherited how would ye bless
Me now your curse! Ah, why should all mankind
For one mans fault thus guiltless be condemned,
If guiltless? But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt, both Mind and Will depraved,
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me? how can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God? Him after all Disputes
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,

And reasoning, though through Mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On me, me only, as the source and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;
So might the wrath.  Fond wish! could thou support
That burden heavier then the Earth to bear
Then all the World much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman? Thus what thou desire
And what thou fear, alike destroys all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future,
To Satan only like both crime and doom.
O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears
And horrors has thou driven me; out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!



Thus Adam to himself lamented loud
Through the still Night, not now, as ere man fell,
Wholesome and cool, and mild, but with black Air
Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom,
Which to his evil Conscience represented
All things with double terror: On the Ground
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground, and oft
Cursed his Creation, Death as oft accused
Of tardy execution, since denounced
The day of his offence.  Why comes not Death,
Said he, with one thrice acceptable stroke
To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hasten to be just?
But Death comes not at call, Justice Divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries.
O Woods, O Fountains, Hillocks, Dales and Bowers,
With other echo late I taught your Shades
To answer, and resound far other Song.
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve bebeld,


Desolate where she sate, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed:
But her with stern regard he thus repelled.



Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best
Befits thee with him leagued, thy self as false
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour Serpentine may show
Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee
Henceforth; least that too heavenly form, pretended
To hellish falsehood, snare the