od on the bare strand,
While the promiscuous crowd stood yet aloof?
The chief were those who from the Pit of Hell
Roaming to seek their prey on earth, dared fix
Their Seats long after next the Seat of God,
Their Altars by his Altar, Gods adored
Among the Nations round, and dared abide

Jehovah thundering out of Zion, throned
Between the Cherubim; yea, often placed

Within his Sanctuary it self their Shrines,
Abominations; and with cursed things
His holy Rites, and solemn Feasts profaned,
And with their darkness dared affront his light.
First Moloch, horrid King besmeared with blood
Of human sacrifice, and parents tears,
Though for the noise of Drums and Timbrels loud
Their children's cries unheard, that past through fire
To his grim Idol.  Him the Ammonite

Worshipped in Rabba and her watery Plain,
In Argob and in Basan, to the stream 
Of utmost Arnon.  Not content with such
Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart
Of Solomon he led by fraud to build
His Temple right against the Temple of God
On that opprobrious Hill, and made his Grove
The pleasant Valley of Hinnom, Tophet thence
And black Gehenna called, the Type of Hell.
Next Chemos, the obscene dread of Moabs Sons,
From Aroar to Nebo, and the wild
Of Southernmost Abarim; in Hesebon

And Heronaim, Seons Realm, beyond
The flowery Dale of Sibma clad with Vines,
And Eleale to the Asphaltick Pool.

Peor his other Name, when he enticed

Israel in Sittim on their march from Nile

To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe.
Yet thence his lustful Orgies he enlarged
Even to that Hill of scandal, by the Grove
Of Moloch homicide, lust hard by hate;
Till good Josiah drove them thence to Hell.
With these came they, who from the bordring flood
Of old Euphrates to the Brook that parts

Egypt from Syrian ground, had general Names

Of Baalim and Ashtaroth, those male,
These Feminine.  For Spirits when they please
Can either Sex assume, or both; so soft
And uncompounded is their Essence pure,
Not tied or manacled with joint or limb,
Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones,
Like cumbrous flesh; but in what shape they choose
Dilated or condensed, bright or obscure,
Can execute their aerie purposes,
And works of love or enmity fulfil.
For those the Race of Israel oft forsook
Their living strength, and unfrequented left
His righteous Altar, bowing lowly down
To bestial Gods; for which their heads as low
Bowed down in Battle, sunk before the Spear
Of despicable foes.  With these in troop
Came Astoreth, whom the Ph??nicians called

Astarte, Queen of Heaven, with crescent Horns;
To whose bright Image nightly by the Moon

Sidonian Virgins paid their Vows and Songs,
In Zion also not unsung, where stood
Her Temple on the offensive Mountain, built
By that uxorious King, whose heart though large,
Beguiled by fair Idolatresses, fell
To Idols foul.  Thammuz came next behind,
Whose annual wound in Lebanon allured
The Syrian Damsels to lament his fate
In amorous dittyes all a Summers day,
While smooth Adonis from his native Rock
Ran purple to the Sea, supposed with blood
Of Thammuz yearly wounded: the Love-tale
Infected Sions daughters with like heat,
Whose wanton passions in the sacred Porch

Ezekiel saw, when by the Vision led

His eye surveyed the dark Idolatries
Of alienated Judah.  Next came one
Who mourned in earnest, when the Captive Ark
Maimed his brute Image, head and hands lopped off
In his own Temple, on the grunsel edge,
Where he fell flat, and shamed his Worshippers:

Dagon his Name, Sea Monster, upward Man
And downward Fish: yet had his Temple high
Reared in Azotus, dreaded through the Coast
Of Palestine, in Gath and Ascalo