 in Heaven, the arch foe subdued
Or Captive dragged in Chains, with hostile frown
And visage all inflamed first thus began.



Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt,
Unnamed in Heaven, now plenteous, as thou see
These Acts of hateful strife, hateful to all,
Though heaviest by just measure on thy self
And thy adherents: how has thou disturb d
Heavens blessed peace, and into Nature brought
Misery, uncreated till the crime
Of thy Rebellion? how has thou instilled
Thy malice into thousands, once upright
And faithful, now proved false.  But think not here

To trouble Holy Rest; Heaven casts thee out
From all her Confines.  Heaven the seat of bliss
Brooks not the works of violence and War.
Hence then, and evil go with thee along
Thy offspring, to the place of evil, Hell,
Thou and thy wicked crew; there mingle broils,
Ere this avenging Sword begin thy doom,
Or some more sudden vengeance winged from God
Precipitate thee with augmented pain.



So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus
The Adversary.  Nor think thou with
wind
Of airy threats to awe whom yet with deeds
Thou can not.  has thou turned the least of these
To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise
Unvanquished, easier to transact with me
That thou should hope, imperious, and with threats
To chase me hence? err not that so shall end
The strife which thou call evil, but wee style
The strife of Glory: which we mean to win,
Or turn this Heaven it self into the Hell
Thou fablest, here however to dwell free,
If not to reign: mean while thy utmost force,
And join him named Almighty to thy aid,
I fly not, but have sought thee far and nigh.



They ended parley, and both addressed for fight
Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue
Of Angels, can relate, or to what things
Liken on Earth conspicuous, that may lift
Human imagination to such height
Of Godlike Power: for likest Gods they seemed,
Stood they or moved, in stature, motion, arms
Fit to decide the Empire of great Heaven.
Now waved their fiery Swords, and in the Air
Made horrid Circles; two broad Suns their Shields

Blazed opposite, while expectation stood
In horror; from each hand with speed retired
Where erst was thickest fight, the Angelic throng,
And left large field, unsafe within the wind
Of such commotion, such as to set forth
Great things by small, If Natures concord broke,
Among the Constellations war were sprung,
Two Planets rushing from aspect malign
Of fiercest opposition in mid Sky,
Should combat, and their jarring Spears confound.
Together both with next to Almighty Arm,
Uplifted imminent one stroke they aimed
That might determine, and not need repeat,
As not of power, at once; nor odds appeared
In might or swift prevention; but the sword
Of Michael from the Armoury of God
Was given him tempered so, that neither keen
Nor solid might resist that edge: it met
The sword of Satan with steep force to smite
Descending, and in half cut sheer, nor staid,
But with swift wheel reverse, deep entering shared
All his right side; then Satan first knew pain,
And writhed him to and fro convolv'd; so sore
The griding sword with discontinuous wound
Passed through him, but the Ethereal substance closed
Not long divisible, and from the gash
A stream of Nectarous humour issuing flowed
Sanguine, such as Celestial Spirits may bleed,
And all his Armour stained ere while so bright.
Forthwith on all sides to his aide was run
By Angels many and strong, who interposed
Defence, while others bore him on their Shields
Back to his Chariot; where it stood retired
From off the files of war; there they him laid

Gnashing for anguish and despite and shame
To find himself not matchless, and his pride
Humbled by such rebuke, so far beneath
His confidence to equal God in power.
Yet soon he healed; for Spirits that live throughout
Vital in every part, not as frail man
In Entrails, Heart or Head, Liver or Reins;
Cannot but by annihilating die;
Nor in their liquid texture mortal wound
Receive, no more then can the fluid Air:
All Heart they live, all Head, all Eye, all Ear,
All Inte