t Legions, whose exile
Hath emptied Heaven, shall fail to re-ascend
Self-raised, and repossess their native seat?
For me be witness all the Host of Heaven,
If counsels different, or danger shunned
By me  some copies have me ,  have lost our
hopes.  But he who reigns
Monarch in Heaven, till then as one secure
Sat on his Throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custom, and his Regal State
Put forth at full, but still his strength concealed,
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New war, provoked; our better part remains
To work in close design, by fraud or guile
What force effected not: that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force, hath overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife
There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation, whom his choice regard
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven:
Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps
Our first eruption, thither or elsewhere:
For this Infernal Pit shall never hold
C??lestial Spirits in Bondage, nor the Abyss
Long under darkness cover.  But these thoughts

Full Counsel must mature: Peace is despaired,
For who can think Submission? War then, War
Open or understood must be resolved.





He spake: and to confirm his words, out-flew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze
Far round illumined hell: highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped Arms
Clashed on their sounding Shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the Vault of Heaven.


There stood a Hill not far whose grisly top
Belched fire and rolling smoke; the rest entire
Shone with a glossy scurff, undoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic Ore,
The work of Sulphur.  Thither winged with speed
A numerous Brigad hastened.  As when Bands
Of Pioners with Spade and Pickax armed
Forerun the Royal Camp, to trench a Field,
Or cast a Rampart.  Mammon led them on,

Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell
From heaven, for even in heaven his looks and thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of Heavens pavement, trodden Gold,
Then aught divine or holy else enjoyed
In vision beatific: by him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransacked the Center, and with impious hands
Rifled the bowels of their mother Earth
For Treasures better hid.  Soon had his crew
Opened into the Hill a spacious wound
And dug out ribs of Gold.  Let none admire
That riches grow in Hell; that soil may best
Deserve the precious bane.  And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wondering tell


Of Babel, and the works of Memphian Kings
Learn how their greatest Monuments of Fame,
And Strength and Art are easily out-done
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour
What in an age they with incessant toil
And hands innumerable scarce perform.
Nigh on the Plain in many cells prepared,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluiced from the Lake, a second multitude
With wondrous Art found out the massy Ore,
Severing each kind, and scummed the Bullion dross:
A third as soon had formed within the ground
A various mould, and from the boiling cells
By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook,
As in an Organ from one blast of wind
To many a row of Pipes the sound-board breaths.Fletcher

Anon out of the earth a Fabric huge
Rose like an Exhalation, with the sound
Of Dulcet Symphonies and voices sweet,
Built like a Temple, where Pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With Golden Architrave; nor did there wa