ce, Temperance, add Love,
By name to come called Charity, the soul
Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loath
To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess
A paradise within thee, happier far.
Let us descend now therefore from this top
Of Speculation; for the hour precise
Exacts our parting hence; and see the Guards,
By me encamped on yonder Hill, expect
Their motion, at whose Front a flaming Sword,

In signal of remove, waves fiercely round;
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve;
Her also I with gentle Dreams have calmed
Portending good, and all her spirits composed
To meek submission: thou at season fit
Let her with thee partake what thou has heard,
Chiefly what may concern her Faith to know,
The great deliverance by her Seed to come
(For by the Women's Seed) on all Mankind.
That ye may live, which will be many days,
Both in one Faith unanimous though sad,
With cause for evils past, yet much more cheered
With meditation on the happy end.





He ended, and they both descend the Hill;
Descended, Adam to the Bower where Eve

Lay sleeping ran before, but found her waked;
And thus with words not sad she him received.



Whence thou return, and whither went, I know;
For God is also in sleep, and Dreams advise,
Which he hath sent propitious, some great good
Presaging, since with sorrow and hearts distress
Wearied I fell asleep: but now lead on;
In me is no delay; with thee to go,
Is to stay here; without thee here to stay,
Is to go hence unwilling; thou to me
Art all things under Heaven, all places thou,
Who for my wilful crime art banished hence.
This further consolation yet secure
I carry hence; though all by me is lost,
Such favour I unworthy am vouchsafed,
By me the Promised Seed shall all restore.



So spake our Mother Eve, and Adam heard
Well pleased, but answered not; for now too nigh

the arch-angel stood, and from the other Hill
To their fixed Station, all in bright array
The Cherubim descended; on the ground
Gliding meteor's, as Evening Mist
Risen from a River o'er the marish glides,
And gathers ground fast at the Labourers heel
Homeward returning.  High in Front advanced,
The brandished Sword of God before them blazed
Fierce as a Comet; which with torrid heat,
And vapour as the Lybian Air adust,
Began to parch that temperate Clime; whereat
In either hand the hastening Angel caught
Our lingering Parents, and to the Eastern Gate
Led them direct, and down the Cliff as fast
To the subjected Plain; then disappeared.
They looking back, all the Eastern side beheld
Of Paradise, so late their happy seat,
Waved over by that flaming Brand, the Gate
With dreadful Faces thronged and fiery Arms:
Some natural tears they dropped, but wiped them soon;
The World was all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide:
They hand in hand with wandering steps and slow,
Through Eden took their solitary way.
THE END.

