ood
Veiled with his gorgeous wings, up springing light
Flew through the midst of Heaven; the Angelic Quires
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
Through all the Empyreal road; till at the Gate
Of Heaven arrived, the gate self-opened wide
On golden Hinges turning, as by work
Divine the soverign Architect had framed.
From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,
Star interposed, however small he sees,
Not unconfirmed to the other shining Globes,
Earth and the Garden of God, with Cedars crowned
Above all Hills. As when by night the Glass
Of Galileo, less assured, observes
Imagined Lands and Regions in the Moon:
Or Pilot from amidst the Cyclades


Delos or Samos first appearing kens
A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing 

Now on the polar winds, then with quick Fann
Winnows the buxom Air;  till within soar
Of Towering Eagles, to all the Fowls he seems
A Ph??nix, gazed by all, as that sole 
Bird
When to enshrine his relics in the Sun's
Bright Temple, to ??gyptian Theb's he flies.
At once on the Eastern cliff of Paradise

He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A Seraph winged; six wings he wore, to shade
His lineaments Divine; the pair that clad
Each shoulder broad, came mantling o'er his breast
With regal Ornament; the middle pair
Girt like a Starry Zone his waste, and round
Skirted his loins and thighs with downy Gold
And colours dipped in Heaven; the third his feet
Shadowed from either heel with feathered mail
sky-tinctured grain. Like Maia's son he stood,
And shook his Plumes, that Heavenly fragrance filled
The circuit wide. Strait knew him all the Bands
Of Angels under watch; and to his state,
And to his message high in honour rise;
For on some message high they guest him bound.
The glittering Tents he passed, and now is come
Into the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrh,
And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nerd, and Balm;
A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature here
Wantoned as in her prime, and plaid at will
Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet,
Wilde above Rule or Art; enormous bliss.
Him through the spicy Forest onward come

Adam discerned, as in the door he sat
Of his cool Bower, while now the mounted Sun
Shot down direct his fervid Rays to warm
Earths inmost womb, more warmth then Adam needs; 

And Eve within, due at her hour prepared
For dinner savoury fruits, of taste to please
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst
Of nectarous draughts between, from milky stream,
Berry or Grape: to whom thus Adam called.



Haste hither Eve, and worth thy sight behold
Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape
Comes this way moving; seems another Morn
Risen on mid-noon;  some great behest from Heaven
To us perhaps he brings, and will voutchsafe
This day to be our Guest. But go with speed,
And what thy stores contain, bring forth and pour
Abundance, fit to honour and receive
Our Heavenly stranger; well we may afford
Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow
From large bestowed, where Nature multiplies
Her fertile growth, and by disburd'ning grows
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.



To whom thus Eve. 
Adam, earths  hallowed mould
Of God inspired, small store will serve, where store,
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;
Save what by frugal storing firmness gains
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:
But I will haste and from each bough and break,
Each Plant and juiciest Gourd will pluck such choice
To entertain our Angel guest, as he
Beholding shall confess that here on Earth
God hath dispensed his bounties as in Heaven.



So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent
What choice to choose for delicacy best,
What order, so contrived as not to mix
Tastes, not well joined, inelegant, but bring
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change, 

Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk
Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yields
In India East or West, or middle shore
In Pontus or th