hese declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine:
Speak ye who best can tell, ye Sons of light,
Angels, for ye behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, Day without Night,
Circle his Throne rejoicing, ye in Heaven,
On Earth join all ye Creatures to extol
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of Stars, last in the train of Night, 

If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crowns the smiling Morn
With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Sphere
While day arises, that sweet hour of Prime.
Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soul,
Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climbst,
And when high Noon has gained, and when thou falls.
Moon, that now meets the orient Sun, now fliest
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their Orb that flies,
And ye five other wandering Fires that move
In mystic Dance not without Song, resound
His praise, who out of Darkness called up Light,
Air, and ye Elements the eldest birth
Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion run
Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things, let your ceaseless change
Vary to our great Maker still new praise.
Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise
From Hill or steaming Lake, dusky or grey,
Till the Sun paint your fleecy skirts with Gold,
In honour to the Worlds great Author rise;
Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd sky,
Or wet the thirsty Earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling still advance his praise.
His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow,
Breathe soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave.
Fountains and ye, that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.
Join voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds,
That singing up to Heaven gate ascend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise;
Ye that in Waters glide, and ye that walk 

The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;
Witness if I be silent, Morn or Even,
To Hill, or Valley, Fountain, or fresh shade
Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise.
Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still
To give us only good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil or concealed,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.



So prayed they innocent, and to their thoughts
Firm peace recovered soon and wonted calm.
On to their mornings rural work they haste
Among sweet dews and flours; where any row
Of Fruit-trees overwoodie reached too far
Their pampered boughs, and needed hands to check
Fruitless embraces: or they led the Vine
To wed her Elm; she spoused about him twines
Her marriageable arms, and with her brings
Her dour the adopted Clusters, to adorn
His barren leaves. Them thus employed beheld
With pity Heavens high King, and to him called

Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deigned
To travel with Tobias, and secured
His marriage with the seven times wedded Maid.




Raphael, said he, thou hear what stir on Earth

Satan from Hell escaped through the darksome Gulf
Hath raised in Paradise, and how disturbed
This night the human pair, how he designs
In them at once to ruin all mankind.
Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend
Converse with Adam, in what Bower or shade
Thou find him from the heat of Noon retired,
To respite his day-labour with repast,
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,
As may advise him of his happy state, 

Happiness in his power left free to will,
Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,
Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware
He swerve not too secure: tell him withal
His danger, and from whom, what enemy
Late fallen himself from Heaven, is plotting now
The fall of others from like state of bliss;
By violence, no, for that shall be withstood,
But by deceit and lies; this let him know,
Least wilfully transgressing he pretend
Surprise, unadmonisht, unforewarnd.



So spake the Eternal Father, and fulfilled
All Justice: nor delayed the winged Saint
After his charge received, but from among
Thousand Celestial Ardors, where he st