rtion due
Given and received; but in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss
Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight, wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort; they rejoice
Each with their kind, Lion with Lioness;
So fitly them in pairs thou has combined;
Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Foul
So well converse, nor with the Ox the Ape;
Worse then can Man with Beast, and least of all.
Where to the almighty answered, not displeased. 

 A nice and subtle happiness I see
Thou to thy self propose, in the choice
Of thy Associates, Adam, and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What think thou then of me, and this my State,
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all Eternity, for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse
Save with the Creatures which I made, and those
To me inferior, infinite descents
Beneath what other Creatures are to thee?

 He ceased, I lowly answered. To
attain
The height and depth of thy Eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things;
Thou in thy self art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficiency found; not so is Man,

But in degree, the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help,
Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
Should propagate, already infinite;
And through all numbers absolute, though One;
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his Image multiplied,
In unity defective, which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secrecy although alone,
Best with thy self accompanied, seek not
Social communication, yet so pleased,
Can raise thy Creature to what height thou wilt
Of Union or Communion, deified;
I by conversing cannot these erect
From prone, nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found, which gained
This answer from the gracious voice Divine. 



Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased,
And find thee knowing not of Beasts alone,
Which thou has rightly named, but of thy self,
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My Image, not imparted to the Brute,
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely should dislike,
And be so minded still; I, ere thou spoke,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone,
And no such company as then thou saw
Intended thee, for trial only brought,
To see how thou could judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,

Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.



He ended, or I heard no more, for now
My earthly by his Heavenly overpowered,
Which it had long stood under, s