igher sat, with grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seemed
A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven
Deliberation sat and public care;
And Princely counsel in his face yet shone, 


Majestic though in ruin: sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders fit to bear
The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention still as Night
Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he spake.



Thrones and Imperial Powers, off-spring of  heaven
Ethereal Virtues; or these Titles now
Must we renounce, and changing stile be called
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclines, here to continue, and build up here
A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heaven hath doomed
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt
From Heavens high jurisdiction, in new League
Banded against his Throne, but to remain
In strictest bondage, though thus far removed,
Under the inevitable curb, reserved
His captive multitude: For he, be sure
In height or depth, still first and last will Reign
Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His Empire, and with Iron Sceptre rule
Us here, as with his Golden those in Heaven.
What sit we then projecting peace and War?
War hath determined us, and foiled with loss
Irreparable; terms of peace yet none
Vouchsafed or sought; for what peace will be given
To us enslaved, but custody severe,
And stripes, and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But to our power hostility and hate,
Untamed reluctance, and revenge though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least 

May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heaven, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege,
Or ambush from the Deep.  What if we find
Some easier enterprise? There is a place
(if ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven
Err not) another World, the happy seat
Of some new Race called Man, about this time
To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favoured more
Of him who rules above; so was his will
Pronounced among the Gods, and by an Oath,
That shook Heavens whole circumference, confirmed.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould,
Or substance, how endued, and what their Power,
And where their weakness, how attempted best,
By force or subtlety: Though Heaven be shut,
And Heavens high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lye exposed
The utmost border of his Kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here perhaps
Some advantageous act may be achieved
By sudden onset, either with Hell fire
To waste his whole Creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive as we were driven,
The puny habitants, or if not drive,
Seduce them to our Party, that their God
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works.  This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our Confusion, and our joy upraise 


In his disturbance; when his darling Sons
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Their frail Original, and faded bliss,
Faded so soon.  Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain Empires.  Thus Beelzebub

Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devised
By Satan, and in part proposed: for whence,
But from the Author of all ill could Spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to spite
The great Creator? But their spite still serves
His glory to augment.  The bold design
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy
Sparkled in all their eyes; with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews.



Well have ye judged, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are,
Great things resolved; which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spite of Fate,
Nearer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms
And opportune excursion we may chance
Re-enter Heaven; or else in some mild Zone
Dwell not unvisited of Heavens fair Light
Secure, and at the brightening Orient beam
Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air,
To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires
Shall breathe her balm.  But first whom shall we send
In search of this new world, whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandering feet
The dark unbottomed infinite Abyss
And through the palpable obscure find out 

His uncouth way, or spread his aerie flight
Up-born with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arr