t distempered, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires
Blown up with high conceits engendering pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his Spear
Touched lightly; for no falsehood can endure
Touch of Celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness: up he starts
Discovered and surprised.  As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous Powder, laid
Fit for the Tun some Magazine to store
Against a rumoured War, the Smutty grain
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the Air:
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stepped those two fair Angels half amazed
So sudden to behold the grisly King;
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon.



Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell
Come thou, escaped thy prison, and transformed,
Why sat thou like an enemy in wait
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?



Know ye not then said Satan, filled  with
scorn,

Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye dared not soar;
Not to know me argues your selves unknown,
The lowest of your throng; or if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?

To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn. 


Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminished brightness, to be known
As when thou stood in Heaven upright and pure;
That Glory then, when thou no more was good,
Departed from thee, and thou resembles now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.



So spake the Cherub, and his grave rebuke
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible: abashed the Devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovely, saw, and pined
His loss; but chiefly to find here observed
His lustre visibly impaired; yet seemed
Undaunted.  If I must contend,
 said he,

Best with the best, the Sender not the sent,
Or all at once; more glory will be won,
Or less be lost.  Thy fear,
 said Zephon  bold,
Will save us trial what the least can doe
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.



The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage;
But like a proud Steed reined, went haughty on,
Champing his iron curb: to strive or fly
He held it vain; awe from above had quelled
His heart, not else dismayed.  Now drew they nigh
The western Point, where those half-rounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joint
Awaiting next command.  To whom their Chief

Gabriel from the Front thus called aloud.



O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern

Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade, 

And with them comes a third of Regal port,
But faded splendour wan; who by his gate
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest;
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours. 



He scarce had ended, when those two approached
And brief related whom they brought, where found,
How busied, in what form and posture couched.


To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake.
 Why has thou, Satan broke
the bounds prescribed
To thy transgressions, and disturbed the charge
Of others, who approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
To question thy bold entrance on this place;
Employed it seems to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss? 



To whom thus Satan, with contemptuous brow.


Gabriel, thou had in Heaven the esteem of wise,
And such I held thee; but this question asked
Puts me in doubt.  Lives there who loves his pain?
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomed? Thou would thy self, no doubt,
And boldly venture to whatever place
Farthest from pain, where thou might hope to change
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;
To thee no reason; who know only good,
But evil has not tried: and wilt object
His will who bound us? let him surer barr
His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance: thus much what was asked.
The rest is true, they found me where they say;
But that implies not violence or harm.



Thus he in scorn.The warlike Angel moved,

Disdainfully half smiling thus replied.

O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise,
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison escaped,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicensed from his bounds in Hell prescribed;
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However, a