l not, but stand unshaken, from within
Or from without, to all temptations armed.
Had thou the same free Will and Power to stand?
Thou had: whom has thou then or what to accuse,
But Heavens free Love dealt equally to all?
Be then his Love accursed, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay cursed be thou; since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
Me miserable! which way shall I fly
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair?
Which way I fly is Hell; my self am Hell;
And in the lowest deep a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.
O then at last relent: is there no place
Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left?
None left but by submission; and that word

Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises and other vaunts
Then to submit, boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent.  Ay me, they little know 

How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
Under what torments inwardly I groan;
While they adore me on the Throne of Hell,
With Diadem and Sceptre high advanced
The lower still I fall, only Supreme
In misery; such joy Ambition finds.
But say I could repent and could obtain
By Act of Grace my former state; how soon
Would height recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feigned submission swore: ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
For never can true reconciling grow
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my punisher; therefore as far
From granting he, as I from begging peace:.
All hope excluded thus, behold in stead
Of us out-cast, exiled, his new delight,
Mankind created, and for him this World.
So farewell Hope, and with Hope farewell Fear,
Farewell Remorse: all Good to me is lost;
Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least
Divided Empire with Heavens King I hold
By thee, and more then half perhaps will reign;
As Man ere long, and this new World shall know.



Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face
Thrice changed with pale, ire, envy and despair,
Which mart his borrowed visage, and betrayed
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld.
For heavenly minds from such distempers foul
Are ever clear.  Whereof he soon aware,
Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm, 

Artificer of fraud; and was the first
That practiced falsehood under saintly show,
Deep malice to conceal, couched with revenge:
Yet not enough had practiced to deceive

Uriel once warned; whose eye pursued him down
The way he went, and on theAssyrian mount
Saw him disfigured, more then could befall
Spirit of happy sort: his gestures fierce
He marked and mad demeanour, then alone,
As he supposed, all unobserved, unseen.
So on he fares, and to the border comes,
Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green,
As with a rural mound the champagne head
Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides
With thicket overgrown, gottesque and wilde,
Access denied; and over head up grew
Insuperable height of loftiest shade,
Cedar, and Pine, and Fur, and branching Palm,
A Sylvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend
Shade above shade, a woody Theatre
Of stateliest view.  Yet higher then their tops
The verdurous wall of paradise up sprung:
Which to our general Sire gave prospect large
Into his nether Empire neighbouring round.
And higher then that Wall a circling row
Of goodliest Trees laden with fairest Fruit,
Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue
Appeared, with gay enamelled colours mixed:
On which the Sun more glad impressed his beams
Then in fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow,
When God hath showered the earth; so lovely seemed
That Landscape: And of pure now purer air
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires 

Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair: now gentle gales
Fanning their odoriferous wings dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils.  As when to them who sail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past

Mozambic, off at Sea North-East winds blow

Sabean Odours from the spicy shore
Of Arabia the blessed, with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a League
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles.
So entertained those odorous sweets the Fiend
Who came their bane, though with them better pleased
Then Asmodeus with the fishy fume,
That drove him, though enamoured, from the Spouse
Of Tobits Son, and with a vengeance sent
From Media post to ??gypped, there fast
bound.