 if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroyed: what can be worse
Then to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned
In this abhorred deep to utter woe;
Where pain of inextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end
The Vassals of his anger, when the Scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing hour
Calls us to Penance? More destroyed then thus
We should be quite abolished and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which to the height enraged,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essential, happier far
Then miserable to have eternal being:
Or if our substance be indeed Divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst 

On this side nothing; and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven,
And with perpetual inroads to Alarm,
Though inaccessible, his fatal Throne:
Which if not Victory is yet Revenge.



He ended frowning, and his look denounced
Desperate revenge, and Battle dangerous
To less then Gods.  On the other side up rose

Belial, in act more graceful and humane;
A fairer person lost not Heaven; he seemed
For dignity composed and high exploit:
But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue
Dropped Manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low;
To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful: yet he pleased the ear,
And with persuasive accent thus began.



I should be much for open War, O Peers,
As not behind in hate; if what was urged
Main reason to persuade immediate War,
Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success:
When he who most excels in fact of Arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what Revenge? the Towers of Heaven are filled
With Armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep
Encamp their Legions, or with obscure wing
Scout far and wide into the Realm of night,
Scorning surprise.  Or could we break our way 

By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest Insurrection, to confound
Heavens purest Light, yet our great Enemy
All incorruptible would on his Throne
Sit unpolluted, and the Ethereal mould
Incapable of stain would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire
Victorious.  Thus repulsed, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
The Almighty Victor to spend all his rage,
And that must end us, that must be our cure,
To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through Eternity,
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated night,
Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? how he can
Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence, or unaware,
To give his Enemies their wish, and end
Them in his anger, whom his anger saves
To punish endless? wherefore cease we then?
Say they who counsel War, we are decreed,
Reserved and destined to Eternal woe;
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse? is this then worst,
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms?
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
With Heavens afflicting Thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seemed
A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay 


Chained on the burning Lake? that sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires
Awaked should blow them into sevenfold rage
And plunge us in the flames? or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? what if all
Her stores were opened, and this Firmament
Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire,
Impending horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery Tempest shall be hurled
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling Ocean, wrapped in Chains;
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd,
Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse.
War therefore, open or concealed, alike
My voice dissuades; for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? he from heavens height
The final h was inked in in some copies of the 1674
edition, apparently at the Simmons' press.

All these our motions vain, sees and derides;
Not more Almighty to resist our might
Then