 wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we then live thus vile, the Race  some 
copies have race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled to suffer here
Chains and these Torments? better these then worse
By my advice; since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree,
The Victors will.  To suffer, as to doe,
Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust
That so ordains: this was at first resolved,
If we were wise, against so great a foe 

Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold
And venturous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
What yet they know must follow, to endure
Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of their Conqueror: This is now
Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps thus far removed
Not mind us not offending, satisfied
With what is punished; whence these raging fires
Will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapour, or inured not feel,
Or changed at length, and to the place conformed
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain;
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light,
Besides what hope the never-ending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waiting, since our present lot appears
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to our selves more woe.



Thus Belial with words clothed in reasons  garb
Counselled ignoble ease, and peaceful sloth,
Not peace: and after him thus Mammon spake.



Either to disinthrone the King of Heaven
We war, if war be best, or to regain
Our own right lost : him to unthrone we then
May hope when everlasting Faith shall yield
To fickle Chance and Chaos judge the strife:
The former vain to hope argues as vain
The latter: for what place can be for us
Within Heavens bound, unless Heavens Lord supreme 


We overpower? Suppose he should relent
And publish Grace to all, on promise made
Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict Laws imposed, to celebrate his Throne
With warbled Hymns, and to his Godhead sing
Forced Halleluiahs; while he Lordly sits
Our envied Soverign, and his Altar breathes
Ambrosial Odours and Ambrosial Flowers,
Our servile offerings.  This must be our task
In Heaven this our delight; how wearisome
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate.  Let us not then pursue
By force impossible, by leave obtained
Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state
Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek
Our own good from our selves, and from our own
Live to our selves, though in this vast recess,
Free, and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easy yoke
Of servile Pomp.  Our greatness will appear
Then most conspicuous, when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse
We can create, and in what place so ever
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labour and endurance.  This deep world
Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst
Thick clouds and dark doth Heavens all-ruling Sire
Choose to reside, his Glory unobscured,
And with the Majesty of darkness round
Covers his Throne;  from whence deep thunders roar
Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell?
As he our darkness, cannot we his Light
Imitate when we please? This Desert soil 

Wants not her hidden lustre, Gems and Gold;
Nor want we skill or Artsome copies have  art,
from whence to raise
Magnificence; and what can Heaven show more?
Our torments also may in length of time
Become our Elements, these piercing Fires
As soft as now severe, our temper changed
Into their temper; which must needs remove
The sensible of pain.  All things invite
To peaceful Counsels, and the settled State
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and were, dismissing quite
All thoughts of war: ye have what I advise.



He scarce had finished, when such murmur filled
The Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain
The sound of blustering winds, which all night long
Had roused the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Sea-faring men overwatched, whose Bark by chance
Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay
After the Tempest:  Such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his Sentence pleased,
Advising peace: for such another Field
They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear
Of Thunder and the Sword of Michael

Wrought still within them; and no less desire
To found this nether Empire, which might rise
By policy, and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heaven.
Which when Beelzebub perceived, then whom,

Satan except, none h