nt
Cornice or Freeze, with bossy Sculptures graven,
The Roof was fretted Gold.  Not Babilon,
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equalled in all their glories, to enshrine

Belus or Serapis their Gods, or seat
Their Kings, when ??gypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxury. The ascending pile
Stood fixed her stately height, and strait the doors
Opening their brazen folds discover wide
Within, her ample spaces, o'er the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof
Pendant by subtle Magic many a row

Of Starry Lamps and blazing Cressets fed
With Naphtha and Asphaltus yielded 
light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring entered, and the work some praise
And some the Architect: his hand was known
In Heaven by many a Towered structure high,
Where Sceptred Angels held their residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King                  
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright.
Nor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land
Men called him Mulciber; and how he fell
From Heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove

Sheer o'er the Crystal Battlements; from Morn
To Noon he fell, from Noon to dewy Eve,
A Summers day; and with the setting Sun
Dropped from the Zenith like a falling Star,
On Lemnos the ??g??an Isle: thus they
relate,
Erring; for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before; nor aught availed him now
To have built in Heaven high Towers; nor did he escape
By all his Engines, but was headlong sent
With his industrious crew to build in hell.
Mean while the winged Heralds by command
Of soverign power, with awful Ceremony
And Trumpets sound throughout the Host proclaim
A solemn Council forthwith to be held
At Pand??monium, the high Capital
Of Satan and his Peers: their summons called
From every Band and squared Regiment
By place or choice the worthiest; they anon
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came
Attended: all access was thronged, the Gates

And Porches wide, but chief the spacious Hall
(Though like a covered field, where Champions bold
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldans chair
Defied the best of Panim chivalry
To mortal combat or career with Lance)
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,
Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings.  As Bees
In spring time, when the Sun with Taurus rides,
Pour forth their populous youth about the Hive
In clusters;  they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed Plank,
The suburb of their Straw-built Citadel,
New rubbed with Baum, expatiate and confer
Their State affairs. So thick the aerie crowd
Swarmed and were straightened; till the Signal given,
Behold a wonder! they but now who seemed
In bigness to surpass Earths Giant Sons
Now less then smallest Dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberless, like that Pigmean Race         
Beyond the Indian Mount, or Fairy Elves,
Whose midnight Revels, by a Forest side
Or Fountain some belated Peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while over-head the Moon
Sits Arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course, they on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund Music charm his ear;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still amidst the Hall
Of that infernal Court. But far within
And in their own dimensions like themselves
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim

In close recess and secret conclave sat
A thousand demigods on golden seat's,
Frequent and full.  After short silence then
And summons read, the great consult began.
The End of the First Book.

