ng: He through Heaven,
That opened wide her blazing Portals, led
To Gods Eternal house direct the way,
A broad and ample rode, whose dust is Gold
And pavement Stars, as Stars to thee appear,
Seen in the Galaxy, that Milky way
Which nightly as a circling Zone thou see
Pouderd with Stars.  And now on Earth the Seventh
Evening arose in Eden, for the Sun
Was set, and twilight from the East came on,
Forerunning Night; when at the holy mount
Of Heavens high-seated top, the empyreal Throne
Of Godhood, fixed for ever firm and sure,

The Filial Power arrived, and sate him down
With his great Father (for he also went
Invisible, yet staid (such privilege
Hath Omnipresence) and the work ordained,
Author and end of all things, and from work
Now resting, blessed and hallowed the Seventh day,
As resting on that day from all his work,
But not in silence holy kept; the Harp
Had work and rested not, the solemn Pipe,
And Dulcimer, all Organs of sweet stop,
All sounds on Fret by String or Golden Wire
Tempered soft Tunings, intermixed with Voice
Choral or Unison: of incense Clouds
Fuming from Golden Censers hid the Mount.
Creation and the Six days acts they sung,

 Great are thy works, Jehovah,
infinite
Thy power; what thought can measure thee or tongue
Relate thee; greater now in thy return
Then from the Giant Angels; thee that day
Thy Thunders magnified; but to create
Is greater then created to destroy.
Who can impair thee, mighty King, or bound
Thy Empire? easily the proud attempt
Of Spirits apostate and their Counsels vain
Thou has repealed, while impiously they thought
Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw
The number of thy worshippers.  Who seeks
To lessen thee, against his purpose serves
To manifest the more thy might: his evil
Thou use, and from thence creates more good.
Witness this new-made World, another Heaven
From Heaven Gate not far, founded in view
On the clear Hyaline, the Glassy Sea;
Of amplitude almost immense, with Starr's

Numerous, and every Star perhaps a World
Of destined habitation; but thou know
Their seasons: among these the seat of men,
Earth with her nether Ocean circumfus'd,
Their pleasant dwelling place.  Thrice happy men,
And sons of men, whom God hath thus advanced,
Created in his Image, there to dwell
And worship him, and in reward to rule
Over his Works, on Earth, in Sea, or Air,
And multiply a Race of Worshippers
Holy and just: thrice happy if they know
Their happiness, and persevere upright.

 So sung they, and the Empyrean
rung,
With Halleluiahs: Thus was Sabbath kept.
And thy request think now fulfilled, that asked
How first this World and face of things began,
And what before thy memory was don
From the beginning, that posterity
Informed by thee might know; if else thou seeks
Aught, not surpassing human measure, say.
The End of the Seventh Book.

