they who to
live well
Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenor of Mans woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.



 From Mans effeminate
slackness it begins,

 Said th'Angel,
 who should better hold  his place
By wisdom, and superior gifts received.
But now prepare thee for another Scene.



He looked and saw wide Territory spread
Before him, Towns, and rural works between,
Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towers,
Concourse in Arms, fierce Faces threatening War,
Giants of mighty Bone, and bold empress;
Part wield their Arms, part courb the foaming Steed,
Single or in Array of Battle ranged
Both Horse and Foot, nor idly mustering stood;
One way a Band select from forage drives
A herd of Beeves, fair Oxen and fair Kine
From a fat Meadow ground; or fleecy Flock,
Ewes and their bleating Lambs over the Plain,
Their Booty; scarce with Life the Shepherds fly,


But colin aide, which makes a bloody Fray;
With cruel Tournament the Squadrons join;
Where Cattle pastured late, now scattered lies
With Carcasses and Arms th'ensanguind Field
Deserted: Others to a City strong
Lay Siege, encamped; by Battery, Scale, and Mine,
Assaulting; others from the wall defend
With Dart and Jav'lin, Stones and sulphurous Fire;
On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds.
In other part the sceptred Heralds call
To Council in the City Gates: anon
Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriors mixed,
Assemble, and Harangues are heard, but soon
In factious opposition, till at last
Of middle Age one rising, eminent
In wise deport, spake much of Right and Wrong,
Of Justice, of Religion, Truth and Peace,
And Judgment from above: him old and young
Exploded and had seized with violent hands,
Had not a Cloud descending snatched him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and Oppression, and Sword-Law
Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found.

Adam was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turned full sad; O what are these,
Deaths Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousandfould the sin of him who slew
His Brother; for of whom such massacher
Make they but of their Brethren, men of men?
But who was that Just Man, whom had not Heaven
Rescued, had in his Righteousness bin lost?



To whom thus Michael.
 These are the product
Of those ill mated Marriages thou saw;

Where good with bad were matched, who of themselves
Abhor to join; and by imprudence mixed,
Produce prodigious Births of body or mind.
Such were these Giants, men of high renown;
For in those days Might only shall be admired,
And Valour and Heroic Virtue called;
To overcome in Battle, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human Glory, and for Glory done
Of triumph, to be styled great Conquerors,
Patrons of Mankind, Gods, and Sons of Gods,
Destroyers rightlier called and Plagues of men.
Thus Fame shall be achieved, renown on Earth,
And what most merits fame in silence hid.
But he the seventh from thee, whom thou behold
The only righteous in a World perverse,
And therefore hated, therefore so beset
With Foes for daring single to be just,
And utter odious Truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints: Him the most High
Rapt in a balmy Cloud with winged Steeds
Did, as thou saw, receive, to walk with God
High in Salvation and the Climes of bliss,
Exempt from Death; to show thee what reward
Awaits the good, the rest what punishment?
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.



He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed,
The brazen Throat of War had ceased to roar,
All now was turned to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feast and dance,
Marrying or prostituting, as befell,
Rape or Adultery, where passing fair
Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broils.


At length a Reverend Sire among them came,
And of their doings great dislike declared,
And testified agains