e Punic Coast, or where

Alcinous reigned, fruit of all kinds, in coat,
Rough, or smooth rind, or bearded husk, or shell
She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the Grape
She crushes, inoffensive moust, and meads
From many a berry, and from sweet kernels pressed
She tempers dulcet creams, nor these to hold
Wants her fit vessels pure, then strews the ground
With Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum'd.
Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meet
His god-like Guest, walks forth, without more train
Accompanied then with his own complete
Perfections, in himself was all his state,
More solemn then the tedious pomp that waits
On Princes, when their rich Retinue long
Of Horses led, and Grooms besmeared with Gold
Dazzles the crowd, and sets them all agape.
Nearer his presence Adam though not old,
Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,
As to a superior Nature, bowing low,


Thus said.  Native of Heaven,
for other  place
None can then Heaven such glorious shape contain;
Since by descending from the Thrones above,
Those happy places thou has deigned a while
To want, and honour these, voutchsafe with us
Two only, who yet by soverign gift possess
This spacious ground, in yonder shady Bower
To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears
To sit and taste, till this meridian heat
Be over, and the Sun more cool decline. 




Whom thus the Angelic Virtue answered mild.


Adam, I therefore came, nor art thou such
Created, or such place has here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heaven
To visit thee; lead on then where thy Bower
Over-shades; for these mid-hours, till Evening rise
I have at will.  So to the Sylvan
Lodge
They came, that like Pomona's Arbour smiled
With flourets decked and fragrant smells; but Eve
Undeckt, save with her self more lovely fair
Then Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feigned
Of three that in Mount Ida naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven; no veil
She needed, Virtue-proof, no thought infirm
Altered her cheek. On whom the Angel Hail

Bestowed, the holy salutation used
Long after to blessed Marie, second Eve.



Hail Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful Womb
Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons
Then with these various fruits the Trees of God
Have heaped this Table.  Raised of
grassy turf
Their Table was, and mossy seats had round,
And on her ample Square from side to side
All Autumn piled, though Spring and Autumn
here
Danced hand in hand. A while discourse they hold;
No fear lest Dinner cool; when thus began
Our Author.  Heavenly stranger,
please to taste
These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom
All perfect good unmeasured out, descends,
To us for food and for delight hath cause
The Earth to yield; unsavoury food perhaps
To spiritual Natures; only this I know,
That one Celestial Father gives to all. 





To whom the Angel.  Therefore
 what he gives
(Whose praise be ever sung) to man in part
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found
No ungrateful food; and food alike those pure
Intelligential substances require
As doth your Rational; and both contain
Within them every lower faculty
Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be sustained and fed; of Elements
The grosser feeds the purer, Earth the Sea,
Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those Fires
Ethereal, and as lowest first the Moon;
Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurged
Vapours not yet into her substance turned.
Nor doth the Moon no nourishment exhale
From her moist Continent to higher Orbs.
The Sun that light imparts to all, receives
From all his elemental recompense
In humid exhalations, and at Even
Sups with the Ocean: though in Heaven the Trees
Of life ambrosial fruit bear, and vines
Yield Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn
We brush mellifluous Dews, and find the ground
Covered with pearly grain: yet God hath here
Varied his bounty so with new delights,
As