
            Paradise Lost. Book IV.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            
Satan now in prospect of Eden,  and nigh the
place where he  must now attempt the bold enterprise which he undertook
 alone against God and Man, falls into many doubts with himself,  and
many passions, fear, envy, and despair;  but at length  confirms himself
in evil, journeys on to Paradise,  whose outward prospect
and situation is described, overleaps the  bounds, sits in the shape of
a Cormorant on the Tree of life, as  highest in the Garden to look
about him.  The Garden  decribbed; Satan's first sight of
Adam and Eve; his  wonder at their excellent form and
happy state, but with  resolution to work their fall; overhears their discourse,
 thence gathers that the Tree of knowledge was forbidden them to  eat
of, under penalty of death; and thereon intends to found his 
Temptation, by seducing them to transgress: then leaves them  a
while, to know further of their state by some other means.   Meanwhile
Uriel descending on a Sun-beam warns Gabriel, who 
had in charge the Gate of Paradise, 

 that some evil spirit had escaped the
Deep, and  past at Noon by his Sphere in the shape of a good Angel
down  to Paradise, discovered after by his furious 
gestures in the Mount. Gabriel promises to find him ere 
morning.  Night coming on, Adam and Eve, discourse
of going  to their rest: their Bower described; their Evening worship. 
Gabriel drawing forth his Bands of Night-watch to walk the 
round of Paradise, appoints two strong Angels to 
Adams Bower, least the evil spirit should be there doing some
 harm to Adam or Eve sleeping; there they find him
at the ear  of Eve,tempting her in a dream, and bring him,
though  unwilling, to Gabriel;  by whom questioned, he
scornfully  answers, prepares resistance, but hindered by a Sign from
Heaven,  flies out of Paradise.


O For that warning voice, which he who saw
TheApocalypse, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be revenged on men,


 Wo to the
inhabitants on  Earth!
 that now,
While time was, our first-Parents had bin warned
The coming of their secret foe, and escaped
Happily so escaped his mortal snare; for now

Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down,
The Tempter ere the Accuser of man-kind,
To wreck on innocent frail man his loss
Of that first Battle, and his flight to Hell:
Yet not rejoicing in his speed, though bold,
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth
Now rolling, boils in his tumultuous breast,
And like a devilish Engine back recoils
Upon himself; horror and doubt distract 

His troubled thoughts, and from the bottom stir
The Hell within him, for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step no more then from himself can fly
By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair
That slumberd, wakes the bitter memory
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes towards Eden which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grieved look he fixes sad,
Sometimes towards Heaven and the full-blazing Sun,
Which now sat high in his Meridian Tower:
Then much revolving, thus in sighs began.



O thou that with surpassing Glory crowned,
Look from thy sole Dominion like the God
Of this new World; at whose sight all the Stars
Hide their diminished heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name
O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy Sphere;
Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down
Warring in Heaven against Heavens matchless King:
Ah wherefore! he deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.
What could be less then to afford him praise,
The easiest recompense, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good proved ill in me,
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
I stained subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude, 


So burdensome still paying, still to ow;
Forgetful what from him I still received,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and discharged; what burden then?
O had his powerful Destiny ordained
Me some inferior Angel, I had stood
Then happy; no unbounded hope had raised
Ambition.  Yet why not? some other Power
As great might have aspired, and me though mean
Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great
Fel