sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide
My Umpire Conscience, whom if they will hear,
Light after light well used they shall attain,
And to the end persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance and my day of grace
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;
But hard be hardened, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall;
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not don; Man disobeying,
Disloyal breaks his fealty, and sins
Against the high Supremacy of Heaven,
Affecting God-head, and so loosing all,
To expiate his Treason hath nought left,
But to destruction sacred and devote,
He with his whole posterity must dye,
Dye he or Justice must; unless for him
Some other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say Heavenly powers, where shall we find such love,
Which of ye will be mortal to redeem
Mans mortal crime, and just the unjust to save,
Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?



He asked, but all the Heavenly Quire stood mute,
And silence was in Heaven: on mans behalf 


Patron or Intercessor none appeared,
Much less that dared upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have bin lost, adjudged to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fullness dwells of love divine,
His dearest mediation thus renewed.



Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace;
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought,
Happy for man, so coming; he her aide
Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost;
Atonement for himself or offering meet,
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring:
Behold me then, me for him, life for life
I offer, on me let thine anger fall;
Account me man; I for his sake will leave
Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee
Freely put off, and for him lastly dye
Well pleased, on me let Death wreck all his rage;
Under his gloomy power I shall not long
Lie vanquished; thou has given me to possess
Life in my self for ever, by thee I live,
Though now to Death I yield, and am his due
All that of me can die, yet that debt paid,
Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave
His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soul
For ever with corruption there to dwell;
But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue
My vanquisher, spoiled of his vented spoil;
Death his deaths wound shall then receive, and stoop
Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed. 


I through the ample Air in Triumph high
Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound.  Thou at the sight
Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
While by thee raised I ruin all my Foes,
Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave:
Then with the multitude of my redeemed
Shall enter Heaven long absent, and return,
Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
Of anger shall remain, but peace assured,
And reconciling; wrath shall be no more
Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire.



His words here ended, but his meek aspect
Silent yet spake, and breathed immortal love
To mortal men, above which only shone
Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
Glad to be offered, he attends the will
Of his great Father.  Admiration seized
All Heaven, what 