ive
The happy Isle; what strength, what art can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe
Through the strict Sentries and Stations thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumspection, and wee now no less
Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send,
The weight of all and our last hope relies.



This said, he sat; and expectation held
His look suspense, awaiting who appeared
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt: but all sat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each
In others countenance read his own dismay
Astonished: none among the choice and prime
Of those Heaven-warring Champions could be found
So hardy as to proffer or accept
Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last

Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised
Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spake.



O Progeny of Heaven, Imperial Thrones,
With reason hath deep silence and demure
Seized us, though undismayed: long is the way
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light;
Our prison strong, this huge convex of Fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant
Barred over us prohibit all egress.
These past, if any pass, the void profound
Of inessential Night receives him next
Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being 

Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf.
If thence he escape into whatever world,
Or unknown Region, what remains him less
Then unknown dangers and as hard escape.
But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers,
And this Imperial Sovereignty, adorned
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
And judged of public moment, in the shape
Of difficulty or danger could deter
Me  some copies have me  from  attempting. 
Wherefore do I assume
These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who Reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more, as he above the rest
High honoured sits? Go therefore mighty Powers,
Terror of Heaven, though fallen; intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tolerable; if there be cure or charm
To respite or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad
Through all the Coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all: this enterprise
None shall partake with me.   Thus
saying rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply,
Prudent, least from his resolution raised
Others among the chief might offer now
(Certain to be refused) what erst they feared;
And so refused might in opinion stand
His Rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn.  But they
Dreaded not more the adventure then his voice

Forbidding; and at once with him they rose;
Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of Thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone; and as a God
Extol him equal to the highest in Heaven:
Nor failed they to express how much they praised,
That for the general safety he despised
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned
Loose all her virtue; least bad men should boast
Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or close ambition varnished o'er with zeal.
Thus they their doubtful consultations dark
Ended rejoicing in their matchless Chief:
As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, overspread
Heavens cheerful face, the lowering Element
Scowls ore the darkened landscape Snow, or shower;
If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with Devil damned
Firm concord holds, men only disagree
Of Creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars,
Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish foes enough besides,
That day and night for his destruction wait.


The Stygian Counsel thus dissolved; and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers,
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemed 

Alone the Antagonist of Heaven, nor less
Than Hells dread Emperor with pomp Supreme,
And God-like imitated State; him round
A Globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed
With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms.
Then of their Session ended they bid cry
With Trumpets regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding Alchemy
By Heralds voice explained: the hollow A