
Paradise Lost. BOOK X.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            Mans transgression known, the Guardian Angels forsake
Paradise, and return up to Heaven to approve  their
vigilance, and are approved, God declaring that The entrance  of Satan
could not be by them prevented. He sends his Son to  judge the
Transgressors, who descends and gives Sentence  accordingly; then
in pity clothes them both, and rescinds. Sin  and Death
sitting till then at the Gates of Hell, by wondrous  simonpathie
feeling the success of Satan in this new World,  and the sin
by Man there committed, resolve to sit no longer  confined in Hell, but
to follow Satan their Sire up to the place  of Man: To make the
way easier from Hell to this World to and  fro, they pave a broad Highway
or Bridge over Chaos,  according to the Track that Satan
first made; then preparing  for Earth, they meet him proud of his
success returning to Hell;  their mutual gratulation. Satan
arrives at Pandemonium,  in full of assembly relates with
boasting his                        
 success against Man; instead of  applause is entercoined
with a general hiss by all his  audience, tranceformed with himself
also suddenly into  Serpents, according to his doom given in       
                          
Paradise; then deluded with a show of the  forbidden Tree
springing up before them, they greedily reaching  to take  of the Fruit,
chew dust and bitter ashes.  The  proceedings of Sin and Death;
God foretells the final Victory  of his Son over them, and the renewing
of all things; but for the  present commands his Angels to make several
altartions in  the Heavens and Elements. Adam more and
more perceiving his  fallen condition heavily bewails, rejects the
consolement of 
Eve; she persists and at length appeases him: then to evade
the  Curse likely to fall on their Offspring, proposes to Adam
violent  ways which he approves not, but conceiving better hope, puts
her  in mind of the late Promise made them, that her Seed should be 
revenged on the Serpent, and exhorts her with him to seek Peace  of the
offended Deity, by repentance and supplication.


MEanwhile the heinous and despiteful act
Of Satan done in Paradise, and how
He in the Serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her Husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven; for what can escape the Eye
Of God All-seeing, or deceive his Heart
Omniscient, who in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire, and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulsed
Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered
The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit,

Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,
Incurred, what could they less, the penalty,
And manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
the Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad
For Man, for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen.  Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heaven Gate, displeased
All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare
That time Celestial visages, yet mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the new-arrived, in multitudes
the Ethereal People ran, to hear and know
How all befell: they towards the Throne Supreme
Accountable made haste to make appear
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance,
And easily approved; when the most High
Eternal Father from his secret Cloud,
Amidst in Thunder uttered thus his voice.



Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge, be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the Earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent,
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this Tempter crossed the Gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail and speed
On his bad Errand, Man should be seduced
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker; no Decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his Fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free Will, to her own inclining left
In even scale.  But fallen he is, and now

What rests but that the mortal Sentence pass
On his transgression, Death denounced that day,
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke; but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee
Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferred
All Judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
Easy it might be seen that I intend
Mercy colleague with Justice, sending thee
Mans Friend, his Mediator, his designed
Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.



So spake the Father, and unfolding bright
Toward the right hand his Glory, on the Son
Blazed forth unclouded Deity; he full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Expressed, and thus divinely ans