violence, he of their wicked ways
Shall them admonish, and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe,
And full of peace, denouncing wrath to come
On their impenitence; and shall return
Of them derided, but of God observed
The one just Man alive; by his command
Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou behold,
To save himself and household from amidst

A World devote to universal rack.
No sooner he with them of Man and Beast
Select for life shall in the Ark be lodged,
And sheltered round, but all the Cataracts
Of Heaven set open on the Earth shall power
Rain day and night, all fountains of the Deep
Broke up, shall heave the Ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise
Above the highest Hills: then shall this Mount
Of Paradise by might of Waves be moved
Out of his place, pushed by the horned flood,
With all his verdure spoiled, and Trees adrift
Down the great River to the opening Gulf,
And there take root an Island salt and bare,
The haunt of Seals and Orcs, and Sea-mews clang.
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctity, if none be thither brought
By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now what further shall ensue, behold.



He looked, and saw the Ark hull on the flood,
Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled,
Driven by a keen North-winde, that blowing dry
Wrinkled the face of Deluge, as decayed;
And the clear Sun on his wide watery Glass
Gazed hot, and of the fresh Wave largely drew,
As after thirst, which made their flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole
With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopped
His Sluices, as the Heaven his windows shut.
The Ark no more now flotes, but seems on ground
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed.
And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appear;
With clamour thence the rapid Currents drive
Towards the retreating Sea their furious tide.


Forthwith from out the Arc a Raven flies,
And after him, the surer messenger,
A Dove sent forth once and again to spy
Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light;
The second time returning, in his Bill
An Olive leaf he brings, pacific sign:
Anon dry ground appears, and from his Arc
The ancient Sire descends with all his Train;
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds
A dewy Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow
Conspicuous with three listed colours gay,
Betok'ning peace from God, and Covenant new.
Whereat the heart of Adam erst so sad
Greatly rejoiced, and thus his joy broke forth.



O thou who future things can represent
As present, Heavenly instructor, I revive
At this last sight, assured that Man shall live
With all the Creatures, and their seed preserve.
Far less I now lament for one whole World
Of wicked Sons destroyed, then I rejoice
For one Man found so perfect and so just,
That God vouchsafed to raise another World
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven,
Distended as the Brow of God appeased,
Or serve they as a flowery verge to bind
The fluid skirts of that same watery Cloud,
Least it again dissolve and shower the Earth?



To whom the Archangel. 
Dexterously thou aim;
So willingly doth God remit his Ire,
Though late repenting him of Man depraved,
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole Earth filled with violence, and all flesh

Corrupting each their way; yet those removed,
Such grace shall one just Man find in his sight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind,
And makes a Covenant never to destroy
The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea
Surpass his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World
With Man therein or Beast; but when he brings
Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein set
His triple-coloured Bow, whereon to look
And call to mind his Covenant: Day and Night,
Seed time and Harvest, Heat and hoary Frost
Shall hold their course, till fire purge all things new,
Both Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.
The End of the Eleventh Book.

