
            Paradise Lost. BOOK VII.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            
Raphael at the request of Adam relates how and
wherefore  this  world was first created; that God, after the 
expelling  of 
Satan and his Angels out of Heaven, declar'd his 
pleasure  to  create  another World and other Creatures to  dwell 
therein;  sends his Son with Glory and attendance of Angels to perform 
the  work  of Creation in six days: the Angels celebrate  with  Hymns 
the performance thereof, and his resignation into Heaven.


DEscend from Heaven Urania, by that
name
If rightly thou art called, whose Voice divine
Following, above theOlympian Hill I soar,
Above the flight of Pegasean wing.
The meaning, not the Name I call: for thou
Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top
Of old Olympus dwell'st, but Heavenly borne,
Before the Hills appeared, or Fountain flowed,

Thou with Eternal wisdom did converse,
Wisdom thy Sister, and with her did play
In presence of the almighty Father, pleased
With thy Celestial Song.  Up led by thee
Into the Heaven of Heavens I have presumed,
An Earthly Guest, and drawn Imperial Air,
Thy tampering; with like safety guided down
Return me to my Native Element:
Least from this flying Steed unreingned, (as once

Bellerophon, though from a lower Clime)
Dismounted, on theAleian Field I fall
Erroneous there to wander and forlorn.
Half yet remains unsung, but narrower bound
Within the visible Diurnal Sphere;
Standing on Earth, not rapt above the Pole,
More safe I Sing with mortal voice, unchanged
To hoarse or mute, though fallen on evil days,
On evil days though fallen, and evil tongues;
In darkness, and with dangers compassed round,
And solitude; yet not alone, while thou
Visit'st my slumbers Nightly, or when Morn
Purples the East: still govern thou my Song,

Urania, and fit audience find, though few.
But drive far off the barbarous dissonance
Of Bacchus and his revellers, the Race
Of that wilde Rout that tore the Thracian Bard
In Rhodope, where Woods and Rocks had Ears
To rapture, till the savage clamour drowned
Both Harp and Voice; nor could the Muse defend
Her Son.  So fail not thou, who thee implores:
For thou are Heavenly, she an empty dream.


Say Goddess, what ensued when Raphael,
The affable Arch-Angel, had forewarned

Adam by dire example to beware 

Apostasy, by what befell in Heaven
To those Apostates, least the like befall
In Paradise to Adam or his Race,
Charged not to touch the interdicted Tree,
If they transgress, and slight that sole command,
So easily obeyed amid the choice
Of all tastes else to please their appetite,
Though wandering.  He with his consorted Eve

The story heard attentive, and was filled
With admiration, and deep Muse to hear
Of things so high and strange, things to their thought
So unimaginable as hate in Heaven,
And War so near