ainst them, since by strength
They measure all, of other excellence
Not emulous, nor care who them excels;
Nor other strife with them do I voutchsafe.



So spake the Son, and into terror changed
His countenance too severe to be beheld
And full of wrath bent on his Enemies.
At once the Four spread out their Starry wings
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the Orbs
Of his fierce Chariot rolled, as with the sound
Of torrent Floods, or of a numerous Host.
He on his impious Foes right onward drove,
Gloomy as Night; under his burning Wheels
The steadfast Empyrean shook throughout,
All but the Throne it self of God.  Full soon
Among them he arrived; in his right hand
Grasping ten thousand Thunders, which he sent
Before him, such as in their Souls infixed
Plagues; they astonished all resistance lost,
All courage; down their idle weapons dropped;
O'er Shields and Helmes, and helmet heads he rode
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate,
That wished the Mountains now might be again
Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire.
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell
His arrows, from the fourfold-visag'd Four,
Distinct with eyes, and from the living Wheels
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes,
One Spirit in them ruled, and every eye
Glared lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire

Among th'accurst, that withered all their strength,
And of their wonted vigour left them drained,
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen.
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked
His Thunder in mid Volly, for he meant
Not to destroy, but root them out of Heaven:
The overthrown he raised, and as a Heard
Of Goats or timorous flock together thronged
Drove them before him Thunder-struck, pursued
With terrors and with furies to the bounds
And Crystal wall of Heaven, which opening wide,
Rolled inward, and a spacious Gap disclosed
Into the wistful Deep; the monstrous sight
Struck them with horror backward, but far worse
Urged them behind; headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of Heaven, Eternal wrath
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.


Hell heard th'unsufferable noise, Hell saw
Heaven ruining from Heaven and would have fled
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep
Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound.
Nine days they fell; confounded Chaos roared,
And felt tenfold confusion in their fall
Through his wilde Anarchy, so huge a rout
Encumbered him with ruin: Hell at last
Yawning received them whole, and on them closed,
Hell their fit habitation fraught with fire
Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain.
Disburdened Heaven rejoiced, and soon repaired
Her mural breach, returning whence it rolled.
Sole Victor from th'expulsion of his Foes

Messiah his triumphal Chariot turned:
To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood
Eye witnesses of his Almighty Acts,

With Jubilee advanced; and as they went,
Shaded with branching Palm, each order bright,
Sung Triumph, and him sung Victorious King,
Son, Heir, and Lord, to him Dominion given,
Worthiest to Reign: he celebrated rode
Triumphant through mid Heaven, into the Courts
And Temple of his mighty Father Throned
On high: who into Glory him received,
Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss.


Thus measuring things in Heaven by things on Earth
At thy request, and that thou may beware
By what is past, to thee I have revealed
What might have else to human Race bin hid;
The discord which befell, and War in Heaven
Among the Angelic Powers, and the deep fall
Of those too high aspiring, who rebelled
With Satan, he who envies now thy state,
Who now is plotting how he may seduce
Thee also from obedience, that with him
Bereaved of happiness thou may partake
His punishment, Eternal misery;
Which would be all his solace and revenge,
As a despite don against the most High,
Thee once to gain Companion of his woe.
But list'n not to his Temptations, warn
Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard
By terrible Example the reward
Of disobedience; firm they might have stood,
Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress.
The End of the Sixth Book.

