wered mild.



Father Eternal, thine is to decree,
Mine both in Heaven and Earth to do thy will
Supreme, that thou in me thy Son beloved
May ever rest well pleased.  I go to judge
On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou know,
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be, for so I undertook
Before thee; and not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me derived, yet I shall temper so
Justice with Mercy, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none
Are to behold the Judgment, but the judged,

Those two; the third best absent is condemned,
Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law
Conviction to the Serpent none belongs.



Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose
Of high collateral glory: him Thrones and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant
Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence

Eden and all the Coast in prospect lay.
Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged.
Now was the Sun in Western cadence low
From Noon, and gentle Aires due at their hour
To fan the Earth now waked, and usher in
The Evening cool when he from wrath more cool
Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both
To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard
Now walking in the Garden, by soft winds
Brought to their Ears, while day declined, they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud.



Where art thou Adam, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off? I miss thee here,
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude,
Where obvious duty meanwhile appeared unsought:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth.

 He came, and with him Eve,
more loath, though first
To offend, discountenanced both, and discomposed;
Love was not in their looks, either to God
Or to each other, but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam faltering long, thus answered brief.



I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice

Afraid, being naked, hid my self. 
To whom
The gracious judge without revile replied.



My voice thou oft has heard, and has not feared,
But still rejoiced, how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who
Hath told thee? has thou eaten of the Tree
Whereof I gave thee charge thou should not eat?



To whom thus Adam sore beset  replied.

 O Heaven! in evil strait this day I
stand
Before my judge, either to undergo
My self the total Crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life;
Whose failing, while her Faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint; but strict necessity
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
Least on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Would easily detect what I conceal.
This Woman whom thou made to be my help,
And gave me as thy perfect gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so Divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in it self,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed;
She gave me of the Tree, and I did eat.



To whom the soverign Presence thus replied.

 Was she thy God, that her thou
did obey
Before his voice, or was she made thy guide,
Superior, or but equal, that to her
Thou did resign thy Manhood, and the Place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled

Hers in all real dignity: Adorned
She was indeed, and lovely to attract
Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts
Were such as under Government well seemed,
Unseemly to bear rule, which was thy part
And person, had thou known thy self aright.



So having said, he thus to Eve in  few:

 Say Woman, what is this which
thou has done?



To whom sad Eve with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied.



The Serpent me beguiled and I did eat.



Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To Judgement he proceeded on the accused
Serpent though brute, unable to transfer
The Guilt on him who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his Creation; justly then accursed,
As vitiated in Nature: more to know
Concerned not Man (since he no further knew)
Nor altered his offence; yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.



Because thou has done this, thou art accursed
Above all Cattle, each Beast of the Field;
Upon thy Belly grovelling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy Life.
Between Thee and the Woman I will put
Enmity, and between thine and her Seed;
Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.



So spake this Oracle, then verified
When J