rd the ground, more coloured then with stone
Of costliest Emblem: other Creature here
Beast, Bird, Insect, or Worm dared enter none;
Such was their awe of Man.  In shady Bower
More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned,

Pan or Silvanus never slept, nor Nymph,
Nor Faunus haunted.  Here in close recess
With Flowers, Garlands, and sweet-smelling Herbs
Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial Bed,
And heavenly Quires the Hymenae??an sung,
What day the genial Angel to our Sire
Brought her in naked beauty more adorned,
More lovely then Pandora, whom the Gods
Endowed with all their gifts, and O too like
In sad event, when to the unwiser Son
Of Japhet brought by Harms, she ensnared
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged
On him who had stole Joves authentic fire.


Thus at their shady Lodge arrived, both stood
Both turned, and under open Sky adored
The God that made both Sky, Air, Earth and Heaven
Which they beheld, the Moons resplendent Globe
And starry Pole:  Thou also
made the Night,
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the Day,
Which we in our appointed work employed
Have finished happy in our mutual help
And mutual love, the Crown of all our bliss
Ordained by thee, and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou has promised from us two a Race 

To fill the Earth, who shall with us extol
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.



This said unanimous, and other Rites
Observing none, but adoration pure
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower
Handed they went; and eased the putting off
These troublesome disguises which wee wear,
Strait side by side were laid, nor turned I wean

Adam from his fair Spouse, nor Eve the Rites
Mysterious of connubial Love refused:
Whatever Hypocrites austerely talk
Of purity and place and innocence,
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all.
Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain
But our destroyer, foe to God and Man?
Hail wedded Love, mysterious Law, true source
Of human offspring, sole propriety,
In Paradise of all things common else.
By thee adulterous lust was driven from men
Among the bestial herds to range, by thee
Founded in Reason, Loyal, just, and Pure,
Relations dear, and all the Charities
Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known.
Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets,
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs used.
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights
His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unhindered, 

Casual fruition, nor in Court Amours
Mixed Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal,
Or Serenate, which the starved Lover sings
To his proud fair, best quited with disdain.
These lulled by Nightingales embracing slept,
And on their naked limbs the flowery roof
Showered Roses, which the Morn repaired.  Sleep on
Blessed pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more.


Now had night measured with her shadow Cone
Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault,
And from their Ivory Port the Cherubim
Forth issuing at th'accustomd hour stood armed
To their night watches in warlike Parade,
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake.




Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the  South
With strictest watch; these other wheel the North,
Our circuit meets full West.   As
flame they part
Half wheeling to the Shield, half to the Spear.
From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he called
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge.
Ithuriel and Zephon, with winged speed
Search through this Garden, leave unsearched no nook,
But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge,
Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harm.
This Evening from the Sun's decline arrived
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escaped
The bars of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:
Such where ye find, seize fast, and hither bring. 



So saying, on he led his radiant Files,
Dazzling the Moon; these to the Bower direct
In search of whom they sought: him there they found
Squat like a Toad, close at the ear of Eve; 

Assaying by his Devilish art to reach
The Organs of her Fancy, and with them forge
Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams,
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint
The animal Spirits that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise
At leas