 flowery Plat, the sweet recess of Eve

Thus early, thus alone; her Heavenly form
Angelic, but more soft, and Feminine,
Her graceful Innocence, her every Air
Of gesture or lest action overawd
His Malice, and with rapine sweet bereaved
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:
That space the Evil one abstracted stood

From his own evil, and for the time remained
Stupidly good, of enmity disarmed,
Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge;
But the hot Hell that always in him burns,
Though in mid Heaven, soon ended his delight,
And tortures him now more, the more he sees
Of pleasure not for him ordained: then soon
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites.



Thoughts, whither have ye led me, with what sweet
Compulsion thus transported to forget
What hither brought us, hate, not love, nor hope
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy,
Save what is in destroying, other joy
To me is lost.  Then let me not let pass
Occasion which now smiles, behold alone
The Woman, opportune to all attempts,
Her Husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb
Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould,
Foe not informidable, exempt from wound,
I not; so much hath Hell debased, and pain
Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven.
She fair, divinely fair, fit Love for Gods,
Not terrible, though terror be in Love
And beauty, not approached by stronger hate,
Hate stronger, under show of Love well feigned,
The way which to her ruin now I tend.



So spake the Enemy of Mankind, enclosed
In Serpent, Inmate bad, and toward Eve

Addressed his way, not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as since, but on his rear,


Circular base of rising folds, that tour'd
Fouled above fouled a surging Maze, his Head
Crested aloft, and Carbuncle his Eyes;
With burnished Neck of verdant Gold, erect
Amidst his circling Spires, that on the grass
Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape,
And lovely, never since of Serpent kind
Lovelier, not those that in Illyria changed

Hermione and Cadmus, or the God
In Epidaurus; nor to which transformed

Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline was seen,
He with Olympias, this with her who bore

Scipio the height of Rome.  With tract oblique
At first, as one who sought access, but feared
To interrupt, side-long he works his way.
As when a Ship by skilful Stearsman wrought
Nigh Rivers mouth or Foreland, where the Wind
Verse oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her Sail;
So varied he, and of his tortuous Train
Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve,
To lure her Eye; she busied heard the sound
Of rustling Leaves, but minded not, as used
To such disport before her through the Field,
From every Beast, more duteous at her call,
Then at Circean call the Herd disguised.
He boulder now, uncalled before her stood;
But as in gaze admiring: Oft he bowd
His turret Crest, and sleek enamelled Neck,
Fawning, and licked the ground whereon she trod.
His gentle dumb expression turned at length
The Eye of Eve to mark his play; he glad
Of her attention gained, with Serpent Tongue
Organic, or impulse of vocal Air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began.




Wonder not, soverign Mistress, if perhaps
Thou can, who art sole Wonder, much less arm
Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain,
Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze
Insatiate, I thus single, nor have feared
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired.
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair,
Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
By gift, and thy Celestial Beauty adore
With ravishment beheld, there best beheld
Where universally admired; but here
In this enclosure wild, these Beasts among,
Beholders rude, and shallow to discern
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who sees thee? (and what is one?) who should be seen
A Goddess among Gods, adored and served
By Angels numberless, thy daily Train.



So gloz'd the Tempter, and his Proem tuned;
Into the Heart of Eve his words made way,
Though at the voice much marvelling; at length
Not unamaz'd she thus in answer spake.

 What may this mean? Language of Man
pronounced
By Tongue of Brute, and human sense expressed?
The first at lest of these I thought denied
To Beasts, whom God on their Creation-Day
Created mute to all articulate sound;
The latter I demur, for in their looks
Much reason, and in their actions oft appears.
Thee, Serpent, subtlest beast of all the field
I knew, but not with human voice endued;
Redouble then this miracle, and say,
How came thou speakable of mute, and how
To me so friendly grown above the rest
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight?


Say, for such wonder claims attention due.



To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied.

 Empress of this fair World,
resplendent Eve,
Easy to me it is to tell thee all
What thou command, and right thou should be obeyed:
I was at first as other Beasts that graze
The trodden Herb, of abject thoughts and low,
As was my food, nor aught but food discerned
Or Sex, and apprehended nothing high:
Till on a day roving the field, I chanced
A goodly Tree far distant to behold
Laden with fruit of fairest colours mixed,
Ruddy and Gold: I nearer drew to gaze;
W