does well, in passion not,
Wherein true Love consists not; love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges, hath his seat
In Reason, and is judicious, is the scale
By which to heavenly Love thou may ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure, for which cause
Among the Beasts no Mate for thee was found.



To whom thus half abashed Adam replied.

 Neither her out-side formed so fair,
nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds
(Though higher of the genial Bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem)
So much delights me as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with Love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of Mind, or in us both one Soul;
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful then harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing; yet still free
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love thou blanket me not, for love thou say
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide;
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask;
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their Love
Express they, by looks only, or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch? 



To whom the Angel with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosie red, Loves proper hue,
Answered.  Let it suffice thee
that thou know

Us happy, and without Love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoys
(And pure thou were created) we enjoy
In eminence, and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars:
Easier then Air with Air; if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, Union of Pure with Pure
Desiring; nor restrained conveyance need
As Flesh to mix with Flesh, or Soul with Soul.
But I can now no more; the parting Sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles

Hesperian sets, my Signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love, but first of all
Him whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command; take heed least Passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free Will
Would not admit; thine and of all thy Sons
The weal or woe in thee is placed; beware.
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blessed: stand fast; to stand or fall
Free in thine own Arbitrament it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require;
And all temptation to transgress repel.



So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction.  Since to
part,
Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose soverign goodness I adore.
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
With grateful Memory: thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return. 



So parted they, the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his Bower.
The End of the Eighth Book.

