this might mean, and whither tend
Wondering; but soon the Almighty thus replied:



O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace
Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou
My sole complacence! well thou know how dear,
To me are all my works, nor Man the least
Though last created, that for him I spare
Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost.
Thou therefore whom thou only can redeem,
Their Nature also to thy Nature join;
And be thy self Man among men on Earth,
Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed,
By wondrous birth: Be thou in Adams room
The Head of all mankind, though Adams Son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee 

As from a second root shall be restored,
As many as are restored, without thee none.
His crime makes guilty all his Sons, thy merit
Imputed shall absolve them who renounce
Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
Receive new life.  So Man, as is most just,
Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die,
And dying rise, and rising with him raise
His Brethren, ransomed with his own dear life.
So Heavenly love shall outdo Hellish hate
Giving to death, and dying to redeem,
So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate
So easily destroyed, and still destroys
In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor shalt thou by descending to assume
Mans Nature, lesson or degrade thine own.
Because thou has, though Throned in highest bliss
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
God-like fruition, quited all to save
A World from utter loss, and has been found
By Merit more then Birthright Son of God,
Found worthiest to be so by being Good,
Far more then Great or High; because in thee
Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds,
Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt
With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne;
Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt Reign
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed universal King, all Power
I give thee, reign for ever, and assume
Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supreme
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce:
All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide 


In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell;
When thou attended gloriously from Heaven
Shalt in the Sky appear, and from thee send
The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaim
Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Winds
The living, and forthwith the cited dead
Of all past Ages to the general Doom
Shall hasten, such a peal shall rouse their sleep.
Then all thy Saints assembled, thou shalt judge
Bad men and Angels, they arraigned shall sink
Beneath thy Sentence; Hell, her numbers full,
Thenceforth shall be for ever shut.  Mean while
The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring
New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell,
And after all their tribulations long
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth.
Then thou thy regal Sceptre shalt lay by,
For regal Sceptre then no more shall need,
God shall be All in All.  But all ye Gods,
Adore him, who to compass all this dies,
Adore the Son, and honour him as me.



No sooner had the Almighty ceased, but all
The multitude of Angels with a shout
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet
As from blessed voices, uttering joy, Heaven rung
With Jubilee, and loud Hosannas filled
The eternal Regions: lowly reverent
Towards either Throne they bow, and to the