The just Decree of God, pronounced and sworn,
That to his only Son by right endued
With Regal Sceptre, every Soul in Heaven
Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due
Confess him rightful King? unjust thou say
Flatly unjust, to bind with Laws the free,
And equal over equals to let Reign,
One over all with unsucceeded power.
Shalt thou give Law to God, shalt thou dispute
With him the points of liberty, who made
Thee what thou art, and formed the Powers of Heaven
Such as he pleased, and circumscribed their being?
Yet by experience taught we know how good,
And of our good, and of our dignity
How provident he is, how far from thought
To make us less, bent rather to exalt
Our happy state under one Head more near
United. But to grant it thee unjust,
That equal over equals Monarch Reign:
Thy self though great and glorious does thou count,
Or all Angelic Nature joint in one,
Equal to him begotten Son, by whom
As by his Word the mighty Father made
All things, even thee, and all the Spirits of Heaven
By him created in their bright degrees,
Crowned them with Glory, and to their Glory named 

Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscured,
But more illustrious made, since he the Head
One of our number thus reduced becomes,
His Laws our Laws, all honour to him done
Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage,
And tempt not these;  but hasten to appease
Th'incensed Father, and the incensed Son,
While Pardon may be found in time besought.



So spake the fervent Angel, but his zeal
None seconded, as out of season judged,
Or singular and rash, whereat rejoiced
the apostate, and more haughty thus replied.

 That we were formed then say thou?
and the work
Of secondary hands, by task transferred
From Father to his Son? strange point and new!
Doctrine which we would know whence learnt: who saw
When this creation was? remember thou
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now;
Know none before us, self-begot, self-raised
By our own quickening power, when fatal course
Had circled his full Orb, the birth mature
Of this our native Heaven, Ethereal Sons.
Our puissance is our own, our own right hand
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try
Who is our equal: then thou shalt behold
Whether by supplication we intend
Address, and to begirt the almighty Throne
Beseeching or besieging. This report,
These tidings carry to the anointed King;
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight. 




He said, and as the sound of waters deep
Hoarse murmur echoed to his words applause
Through the infinite Host, nor less for that
The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone
Encompassed round with foes, thus answered bold.



O alienate from God, O spirit accursed,
Forsak'n of all good; I see thy fall
Determined, and thy hapless crew involved
In this perfidious fraud, contagion spread
Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth
No more be troubled how to quit the yoke
Of Gods Messiah; those indulgent Laws
Will not be now Vouchsafed, other Decrees
Against thee are gon forth without recall;
That Golden Sceptre which thou did reject
Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and break
Thy disobedience. Well thou did advise,
Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly
These wicked Tents devoted, least the wrath
Impending, raging into sudden flame
Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel
His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire.
Then who created thee lamenting learn,
When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.



So spake the Seraph Abdiel faithful found,
Among the faithless, faithful only he;
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
unshaken, unseduc'd, unterrifi'd
His Loyalty he kept, his Love, his Zeal;
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind
Though single. From amidst them forth he passed, 

Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustained
Superior, nor of violence feared aught;
And with retorted scorn his back he turned
On those proud Towers to swift destruction doomed.
The End of the Fifth Book.

