hom, how spread
Among the sons of Morn, what multitudes
Were banded to oppose his high Decree;
And smiling to his only Son thus said.



Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,
Nearly it now concerns us to be sure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of Deity or Empire, such a foe
Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North;
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try
In battle, what our Power is, or our right.
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw
With speed what force is left, and all employ
In our defence, lest unawares we lose
This our high place, our Sanctuary, our Hill.



To whom the Son with calm aspect and clear
Lightning Divine, ineffable, serene,
Made answer.  Mighty Father, thou
thy foes
Justly has in derision, and secure
Laugh at their vain designs and tumults vain,
Matter to me of Glory, whom their hate
Illustrates, when they see all Regal Power
Given me to quell their pride, and in event 

Know whether I be dextrose to subdue
Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven.



So spake the Son, but Satan with his Powers
Far was advanced on winged speed, an Host
Innumerable as the Stars of Night,
Or Stars of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun
Impearls on every leaf and every floor. 
Regions they passed, the mighty Regencies
Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones
In their triple Degrees, Regions to which
All thy Dominion, Adam, is no more
Then what this Garden is to all the Earth,
And all the Sea, from one entire globose
Stretched into Longitude; which having passed
At length into the limits of the North
They came, and Satan to his Royal seat
High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount
Raised on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towers
From Diamond Quarries hewn, and Rocks of Gold,
The Palace of great Lucifer, (so call
That Structure in the Dialect of men
Interpreted) which not long after, he
Affecting all equality with God,
In imitation of that Mount whereon

Messiah was declared in sight of Heaven,
The Mountain of the Congregation called;
For thither he assembled all his Train,
Pretending so commanded to consult
About the great reception of their King,
Thither to come, and with calumnious Art
Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears.



Thrones, Dominations, Princedomes, Virtues,  Powers,
If these magnificant Titles yet remain 

Not merely titular, since by Decree
Another now hath to himself engrossed
All Power, and us eclipsed under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here,
This only to consult how we may best
With what may be devised of honours new
Receive him coming to receive from us
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile,
Too much to one, but double how endured,
To one and to his image now proclaimed?
But what if better counsels might erect
Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke?
Will ye submit your necks, and choose to bend
The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust
To know ye right, or if ye know your selves
Natives and Sons of Heaven possessed before
By none, and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free; for Orders and Degrees
Jar not with liberty, but well consist.
Who can in reason then or right assume
Monarchy over such as live by right
His equals, if in power and splendour less,
In freedom equal? or can introduce
Law and Edict on us, who without law
Err not, much less for this to be our Lord,
And look for adoration to the abuse
Of those Imperial Titles which assert
Our being ordained to govern, not to serve?



Thus far his bold discourse without control
Had audience, when among the Seraphim

Abdiel, then whom none with more zeal adored
The Deity, and divine commands obeyed, 

Stood up, and in a flame of zeal severe
The current of his fury thus opposed.



O argument blasphemous, false and proud!
Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven
Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate
In place thy self so high above thy Peers.
Can thou with impious obloquy condemn
