rs
Of Amarantin Shade, Fountain or Spring,
By the waters of Life, where ere they sate
In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light
Hasted, resorting to the Summons high,
And took their Seats; till from his Throne supreme
the almighty thus pronounced his soverign Will.



O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both Good and Evil, since his taste
Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast
His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got,
Happier, had it sufficed him to have known
Good by it self, and Evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
My motions in him, longer then they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain
Self-left.  Least therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the Garden forth to Till
The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soil.



Michael, this my behest have thou in charge,
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming Warriors, least the Fiend
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant possession some new trouble raise:.
has thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair,
From hallowed ground th'unholie, and denounce
To them and to their Progeny from thence


Perpetual banishment.  Yet least they faint
At the sad Sentence rigorously urged,
For I behold them softened and with tears
Bewailing their excess, all terror hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveal
To Adam what shall come in future days,
As I shall thee enlighten, intermix
My Covenant in the women's seed renewed;
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:
And on the East side of the Garden place,
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs,
Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame
Wide waving, all approach far off to fright,
And guard all passage to the Tree of Life:
Least Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foul, and all my Trees their prey,
With whose stolen Fruit Man once more to delude.



He ceased; and th'Archangelic Power prepared
For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each
Had, like a double Janus, all their shape
Spangled with eyes more numerous then those
Of Argus, and more wakeful then to drouze,
Charmed with Arcadian Pipe, the Pastoral Reed
Of Harms, or his opiate Rod.  Mean while
To resolute the World with sacred Light

Leucothea waked, and with fresh dews imbalmd
The Earth, when Adam and first Matron Eve

Had ended now their Orisons, and found
Strength added from above, new hope to spring
Out of despair, joy, but with fear yet linked;
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed.




Eve, easily may Faith admit, that all

The good which we enjoy, from Heaven descends;
But that from us ought should ascend to Heaven
So prevalent as to concern the mind
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer,
Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne
Even to the Seat of God.  For since I sought
By Prayer th'offended Deity to appease,
Kneeled and before him humbled all my heart,
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his ear; persuasion in me grew
That I was heard with favour; peace returned
Home to my Breast, and to my memory
His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe;
Which then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live.  Whence Hail to thee,

Eve rightly called, Mother of all Mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live, and all things live for Man.



To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek.

 Ill worthy I such title should
belong
To me transgressor, who for thee ordained
A help, became thy snare; to me reproach
Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I who first brought Death on all, am graced
The source of life; next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsafe