dvantage gain.  What if the Sun
Be Center to the World, and other Stars
By his attractive virtue and their own
Incited, dance about him various rounds?
Their wandering course now high, now low, then hid,
Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,
In six thou see, and what if seventh to these
The Planet Earth, so steadfast though she seem,
Insensibly three different Motions move?
Which else to several Spears thou must ascribe,
Moved contrary with thwart obliquities,
Or save the Sun his labour, and that swift
Nocturnal and Diurnal rhomb supposed,
Invisible else above all Stars, the Wheel
Of Day and Night; which needs not thy belief,
If Earth industrious of her self fetch Day
Travelling East, and with her part averse
From the Suns beam meet Night, her other part
Still luminous by his ray.  What if that light
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air,
To the terrestrial Moon be as a Star
Enlightening her by Day, as she by Night
This Earth? reciprocal, if Land be there,

Fields and Inhabitants: Her spots thou see
As Clouds, and Clouds may rain, and Rain produce
Fruits in her softened Soil, for some to eat
Allotted there; and other Suns perhaps
With their attendant Moons thou wilt descry
Communicating Male and Female Light,
Which two great Sexes animate the World,
Stored in each Orb perhaps with some that live.
For such vast room in Nature unpossessed
By living Soul, desert and desolate,
Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute
Each Orb a glimpse of Light, conveyed so far
Down to this habitable, which returns
Light back to them, is obvious to dispute.
But whether thus these things, or whether not,
Whether the Sun predominant in Heaven
Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun
He from the East his flaming rode begin,
Or She from West her silent course advance
With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps
On her soft Axle, while she paces Even,
And bears thee soft with the smooth Air along,
Solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid,
Leave them to God above, him serve and fear;
Of other Creatures, as him pleases best,
Wherever placed, let him dispose: joy thou
In what he gives to thee, this Paradise

And thy fair Eve; Heaven is for thee too high
To know what passes there; be lowly wise:.
Think only what concerns thee and thy being;
Dream not of other Worlds, what Creatures there
Live, in what state, condition or degree,
Contented that thus far hath been revealed
Not of Earth only but of highest Heaven.





To whom thus Adam cleared of doubt, replied.

 How fully has thou satisfied me,
pure
Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene,
And freed from intricacies, taught to live,
The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts
To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
And not molest us, unless we our selves
Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions 