
            Paradise Lost. Book I.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            This first Book proposes, first in brief, the whole Subject, 
Mans disobedience, and the loss thereupon of Paradise wherein  he
was placed: Then touches the prime cause of his fall,  the
Serpent, or rather Satan in the Serpent; who revolting from 
God, and drawing to his side many Legions of Angels, was by the  command
of God driven out of Heaven with all his Crew into the  great Deep.
 Which action past over, the Poem hastes into the  midst of things,
presenting Satan
 with his Angels now  fallen into Hell,
described here, not in the Center  (for Heyven and Earth
may be supposed as yet not made,  certainly not yet accursed) but in
a place of utter darkness,  fittest called Chaos: Here Satan
with his Angels  lying on \the burning Lake, thunder-struck and astonished,
after a certain  space recovers, as from confusion, calls up him who
next in Order  and Dignity lay by him; they confer of their miserable
fall. 
Satan awakens all his Legions, who  lay till then
in the same manner confounded; They rise, their Numbers,  array of
Battle, their chief Leaders named, according to the Idols  known afterwards
in Canaan and the Countries adjoining. To  these Satandirects
his Speech, comforts them with hope yet of  regaining Heaven, but tells
them lastly of a new World and new  kind of Creature to be created,
according to an ancient Prophecy  or report in Heaven; for that
Angels were long before this  visible Creation, was the opinion of many
ancient Fathers.  
To find out the truth of this Prophecy, and what to determine 
thereon he refers to a full Council.  What his Associates thence  attempt.
Pandemonium the Palace of Satan rises, suddenly built
out of the Deep: The infernal Peers there sit in  Council.



OF Mans First Disobedience, and the Fruit
Of that Forbidden Tree, whose mortal taste
Brought Death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
Restore us, and regain the blissful Seat,
Sing Heavenly Muse, that on the secret top
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, did inspire
That Shepherd, who first taught the chosen Seed,
In the Beginning how the Heavens and Earth
Rose out of Chaos: Or if Zion Hill
Delight thee more, and Siloa's Brook that flowed
Fast by the Oracle of God; I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventurous Song,


That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above the Aonian Mount, while it pursues
Things undignified yet in Prose or Rhyme.
And chiefly Thou, some copies omit the  commaO
Spirit, that does prefer
Before all Temples the upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for Thou know; Thou from the first
Was present, and with mighty wings outspread
Dove-like sat brooding on the vast Abyss
And made it pregnant: What in me is dark
Illuminates, what is low raise and support;
That to the height of this great Argument
I may assert Eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to men.


Say first, for Heaven hides nothing from thy view
Nor the deep Tract of Hell, say first what cause
Moved our Grand Parents in that happy State,
Favoured of Heaven so highly, to fall off
From their Creator, and transgress his Will
For one restraint, Lords of the World besides?
Who first seduced them to that foul revolt?
The infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile
Stirred up with Envy and Revenge, deceived
The Mother of Mankind, what time his Pride
Had cast him out from Heaven, with all his Host
Of Rebel Angels, by whose aid aspiring
To set himself in Glory above his Peers,
He trusted to have equalled the most High,
If he opposed; and with ambitious aim
Against the Throne and Monarchy of God
Raised im