ath.
This Paradise I give thee, count it thine
To Till and keep, and of the Fruit to eat:
Of every Tree that in the Garden grows
Eat freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth:
But of the Tree whose operation brings
Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set
The Pledge of thy Obedience and thy Faith
Amid the Garden by the Tree of Life
Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste,
And shun the bitter consequence: for know,
The day thou eats thereof, my sole command
Transgressed, inevitably thou shalt dye;
From that day mortal, and this happy State
Shalt loose, expelled from hence into a World
Of woe and sorrow.   Sternly he
pronounced
The rigid interdiction, which resounds
Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice
Not to incur; but soon his clear aspect
Returned and gracious purpose thus renewed.

 Not only these fair bounds, but all
the Earth
To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords
Possess it, and all things that therein live,
Or live in Sea, or Air, Beast, Fish, and Foul.
In sign whereof each Bird and Beast behold
After their kinds; I bring them to receive
From thee their Names, and pay thee fealty
With low subjection; understand the same
Of Fish within their watery residence,
Not hither summoned, since they cannot change
Their Element to draw the thinner Air.


 As thus he spake, each Bird and
Beast behold
Approaching two and two, These cowering low
With blandishment, each Bird stooped on his wing.
I named them, as they passed, and understood
Their Nature, with such knowledge God endued
My sudden apprehension: but in these
I found not what me thought I wanted still;
And to the Heavenly vision thus presumed.



O by what Name, for thou above all these,
Above mankind, or aught then mankind higher,
Surpassest far my naming, how may I
Adore thee, Author of this Universe,
And all this good to man, for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal
Thou has provided all things: but with me
I see not who partakes.  In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright,
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied. 

 What call thou solitude, is not
the Earth
With various living creatures, and the Air
Replenished, and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee, know thou not
Their language and their ways, they also know,
And reason not contemptibly; with these
Find pastime, and bear rule; thy Realm is large.

 So spake the Universal Lord, and
seemed
So ordering.  I with leave of speech implored,
And humble deprecation thus replied.


Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power,
My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
has thou not made me here thy substitute,
And these inferior far beneath me set?

Among unequals what society
Can sort, what harmony or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in propo