vain.
But apt the Mind or Fancy is to roave
Unchecked, and of her roving is no end;
Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn,
That not to know at large of things remote
From use, obscure and subtle, but to know
That which before us lies in daily life,
Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume,
Or emptiness, or fond impertinence,
And renders us in things that most concern
Unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek.
Therefore from this high pitch let us descend
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand
Useful, whence happily mention may arise
Of something not unseasonable to ask
By sufferance, and thy wonted favour deigned.
Thee I have heard relating what was don
Ere my remembrance: now hear me relate
My Story, which perhaps thou has not heard;
And Day is yet not spent; till then thou see
How subtly to detain thee I devise,
Inviting thee to hear while I relate,
Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply:
For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven,
And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear
Then Fruits of Palm-tree pleasantest to thirst

And hunger both, from labour, at the hour
Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill,
Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine
Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety.

 To whom thus Raphael
answered heavenly meek.



Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men,
Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee
Abundantly his gifts hath also poured
Inward and outward both, his image fair:
Speaking or mute all comeliness and grace
Attends thee, and each word, each motion forms,
Nor less think wee in Heaven of thee on Earth
Then of our fellow servant, and inquire
Gladly into the ways of God with Man:
For God we see hath honoured thee, and set
On Man his Equal Love: say therefore on;
For I that Day was absent, as befell,
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure,
Far on excursion toward the Gates of Hell;
Squared in full Legion (such command we had)
To see that none thence issued forth a spy,
Or enemy, while God was in his work,
Least he incensed at such eruption bold,
Destruction with Creation might have mixed.
Not that they dared without his leave attempt,
But us he sends upon his high behests
For state, as Soverign King, and to enure
Our prompt obedience.  Fast we found, fast shut
The dismal Gates, and barricaded strong;
But long ere our approaching heard within
Noise, other then the sound of Dance or Song,
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage.
Glad we returned up to the coasts of Light
Ere Sabbath Evening: so we had in charge.

But thy relation now; for I attend,
Pleased with thy words no less then thou with mine.



So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire.

 For Man to tell how human Life began
Is hard; for who himself beginning knew?
Desire with thee still longer to converse
Induced me.  As new waked from soundest sleep
Soft on the flowery h