
Paradise Lost. BOOK XI.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            The Son of God presents to his Father the Prayers of our
first Parents now repenting, and intercedes for them: God accepts them,
but declares that they must no longer abide in Paradise;
sends Michael with a Band of Cherubim to dispossess them; but
first to reveal to Adam future things: Michaels
coming down. Adam shows to
Eve certain ominous signs; he discerns Michaels
approach, goes out to meet him: the Angel denounces their departure.
Eve's Lamenttion. Adam pleads, but submits:
The Angel leads him up to a high Hill, sets before him in vision what
shall happ'n till the Flood.


THus they in lowliest plight repentant stood
Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above
Prevenient Grace descending had removed
The stony from their hearts, & made new flesh
Regenerate grow instead, that sighs now breathed

Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight
Then loudest Oratory: yet their port
Not of mean suitors, nor important less
Seemed their Petition, then when th'ancient Pair
In Fables old, less ancient yet then these,

Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha to restore
The Race of Mankind drowned, before the Shrine
Of Themis stood devout.  To Heaven their prayers
Flew up, nor mist the way, by envious winds
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passed
Dimentionless through Heavenly doors; then clad
With incense, where the Golden Altar fumed,
By their great Intercessor, came in sight
Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.



See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung
From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs
And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixed
With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring,
Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed
Sow'n with contrition in his heart, then those
Which his own hand manuring all the Trees
Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen
From innocence.  Now therefore bend thine ear
To supplication, hear his sighs though mute;
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him, me his Advocate
And propitiation, all his works on me
Good or not good engraft, my Merit those
Shall perfect, and for these my Death shall pay.
Accept me, and in me from these receive
The smell of peace toward Mankind, let him live
Before thee reconciled, at least his days

Numbered, though sad, till Death, his doom (which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse)
To better life shall yield him, where with me
All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss,
Made one with me as I with thee am one.



To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene.

All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain, all thy request was my Decree:
But longer in that Paradise to dwell,
The Law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal Elements that know
No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foul,
Eject him tainted now, and purge him off
As a distemper, gross to air as gross,
And mortal food, as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first
Distempered all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted.  I at first with two fair gifts
Created him endowed, with Happiness
And Immortality: that fondly lost,
This other served but to eternize woe;
Till I provided Death; so Death becomes
His final remedy, and after Life
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined
By Faith and faithful works, to second Life,
Waked in the renovation of the just,
Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed.
But let us call to Synod all the Blessed
Through Heavens wide bounds; from them I will not hide
My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant Angels late they saw;
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed.



He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright Minister that watched, he blew
 His Trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general Doom.  the Angelic blast
Filled all the Regions: from their blissful Bowe