ion over-ruled
Their will, disposed by absolute Decree
Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed 


Their own revolt, not I: if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of Fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, Authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge and what they choose; for so
I formed them free, and free they must remain,
Till they enthral themselves: I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high Decree
Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordained
Their freedom, they themselves ordained their fall.
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Self-tempted, self-depraved: Man falls deceived
By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none: in Mercy and Justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel,
But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine.



Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance filled
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffused:
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious, in him all his Father shone
Substantially expressed, and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeared,
Love without end, and without measure Grace,
Which uttering thus he to his Father spake.



O Father, gracious was that word which closed
Thy soverign sentence, that Man should find grace;
For which both Heaven and Earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of Hymns and sacred Songs, where to thy Throne
Encompassed shall resound thee ever blessed.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man 

Thy creature late so loved, thy youngest Son
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joined
With his own folly? that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art Judge
Of all things made, and judge only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfil
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
Or proud return though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplished and to Hell
Draw after him the whole Race of mankind,
By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy self
Abolish thy Creation, and unmake,
For him, what for thy glory thou has made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questioned and blasphemed without defence.



To whom the great Creator thus replied.

 O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief
delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All has thou spok'n as my thoughts are, all
As my Eternal purpose hath decreed:
Man shall not quite be lost, but saved who will,
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsafed; once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthralled
By sin to foul exorbitant desires;
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe,
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fallen condition is, and to me ow
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace
Elect above the rest; so is my will: 

The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warned
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offered grace
Invites; for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To Prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endeavoured with 