 


He plucked, he tasted; me damp horror chilled
At such bold words vouched with a deed so bold:
But he thus overjoyed,  O Fruit
Divine,
Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropped,
Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit
For God's, yet able to make Gods of Men:
And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant grows,
The Author not impaired, but honoured more?
Here, happy Creature, fair Angelic Eve,
Partake thou also; happy though thou art,
Happier thou may be, worthier can not be:
Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confined,
But sometimes in the Air, as wee, sometimes
Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
What life the Gods live there, and such live thou.
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had plucked; the pleasant savoury smell
So quickened appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the Clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The Earth outstretched immense, a prospect wide
And various: wondering at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly
My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O how glad I waked
To find this but a dream!  Thus Eve
her  Night
Related, and thus Adam answered sad.



Best image of my self and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear; 

Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure. But know that in the Soul
Are many lesser Faculties that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senses represent,
She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,
Which Reason joining or disjoining, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell when Nature rests,
Oft in her absence mimic Fancy wakes
To imitate her; but misjoining shapes,
Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams,
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Some such resemblances methinks I find
Of our last Evenings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange; yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come or go, so unproved, and leave
No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou did abhor to dream,
Waking thou never wilt consent to do.
Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks
That wont to be more cheerful and serene
Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World,
And let us to our fresh employments rise
Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours
That open now their choicest bosomed smells
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.



So cheered he his fair Spouse, and she was cheered,
But silently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair;
Two other precious drops that ready stood, 

Each in their Crystal sluice, he ere they fell
Kissed as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious awe, that feared to have offended.


So all was cleared, and to the Field they haste.
But first from under shady arborous roof,
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of day-spring, and the Sun, who scarce up risen
With wheels yet hovering o'er the Ocean brim,
Shot parallel to the earth his dewy ray,
Discovering in wide Landscape all the East
Of Paradise and Edens happy Plains,
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began
Their Orisons, each Morning duly paid
In various style, for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced or sung
Unmeditated, such prompt eloquence
Flowed from their lips, in Prose or numerous Verse,
More tuneable then needed Lute or Harp
To add more sweetness, and they thus began.



These are thy glorious works, Parent of  good,
Almighty, thine this universal Frame,
Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then!
Unspeakable, who first above these Heavens
To us invisible or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works, yet t