
            Paradise Lost. Book III.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            God sitting on his Throne sees Satan flying towards this
world,  then newly created; shows him to the Son who sat at his right 
hand; foretells the success of Satan in perverting mankind; 
clears his own Justice and Wisdom from all imputation, having  created
Man free and able enough to have withstood his  Templa; yet
declares his purpose of grace towards him, in  regard he fell not of his
own malice; as did Satan, but by him  seduced.  The Son of God
renders praises to his Father for the  manifestation of his gracious purpose
towards Man; but God  again declares, that Grace cannot be extended
towards Man without  the satisfaction of divine Justice; Man hath
offended the majesty  of God by aspiring to God-head, and therefore
with all his  Progeny devoted to death must dye, unless some one can be
found  sufficient to answer for his offence, and undergo his Punishment.
  The Son of God freely offers himself a Ransom for Man: the 
 Father accepts him, ordains his incarnation,  pronounces
his exaltation above all Names in Heaven and  Earth; commands all the
Angels to adore him; they obey, and  hymning to their Harps in full
Quire, celebrate the Father and the  Son.  Mean while  Satan
alights upon the bare Convex of  this Worlds outermost Orb; where
wandering he first finds a  place since called The Lymbo of Vanity; what
persons and things  fly up thither; thence comes to the Gate of Heaven,
described  ascending by stairs, and the waters above the Firmament
 that flow about it: His passage thence to the Orb of the Sun; he  finds
there Uriel the Regient of that Orb, but first changes 
himself into the shape of a meaner Angel; and pretending a  zealous
desire to behold the new Creation and Man whom God had  placed here,
enquires of him the place of his habitation, and is  directed; alights
first on Mount
Niphates.


HAil holy Light, offspring of Heaven first-born,
Or of the Eternal Coeternal beam
May I express thee unblamed? since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from Eternity, dwelt then in thee,
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or hear thou rather pure Ethereal stream,
Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun,
Before the Heavens thou were, and at the voice
Of God, as with a Mantle did invest
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing,
Escaped the Stygian Pool, though long detained 

In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne
With other notes then to the Orphean Lyre
I sung of Chaos and Eternal Night,
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to re-ascend,
Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy soverign vital Lamp; but thou
Revisits not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop serene hath quenched their Orbs,
Or dim suffusion veiled.  Yet not the more
Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt
Clear Spring, or shady Grove, or Sunny Hill,
Smite with the love of sacred Song; but chief
Thee Zion and the flowery Brooks beneath
That wash thy hallowed feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit: nor sometimes forget
Those other two equalled with me in Fate,
So were I equalled with them in renown,
Blind Thamyris a