
               
            
            
               O argument blasphemous, false and proud!
               Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven
               Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate
               In place thy self so high above thy Peers.
               Can thou with impious obloquy condemn
               The just Decree of God, pronounced and sworn,
               That to his only Son by right endued
               With Regal Sceptre, every Soul in Heaven
               Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due
               Confess him rightful King? unjust thou say
               Flatly unjust, to bind with Laws the free,
               And equal over equals to let Reign,
               One over all with unsucceeded power.
               Shalt thou give Law to God, shalt thou dispute
               With him the points of liberty, who made
               Thee what thou art, and formed the Powers of Heaven
               Such as he pleased, and circumscribed their being?
               Yet by experience taught we know how good,
               And of our good, and of our dignity
               How provident he is, how far from thought
               To make us less, bent rather to exalt
               Our happy state under one Head more near
               United. But to grant it thee unjust,
               That equal over equals Monarch Reign:
               Thy self though great and glorious does thou count,
               Or all Angelic Nature joint in one,
               Equal to him begotten Son, by whom
               As by his Word the mighty Father made
               All things, even thee, and all the Spirits of Heaven
               By him created in their bright degrees,
               Crowned them with Glory, and to their Glory named 
               
               Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
               Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscured,
               But more illustrious made, since he the Head
               One of our number thus reduced becomes,
               His Laws our Laws, all honour to him done
               Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage,
               And tempt not these;  but hasten to appease
               Th'incensed Father, and the incensed Son,
               While Pardon may be found in time besought.

               
            
            
               O alienate from God, O spirit accursed,
               Forsak'n of all good; I see thy fall
               Determined, and thy hapless crew involved
               In this perfidious fraud, contagion spread
               Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth
               No more be troubled how to quit the yoke
               Of Gods Messiah; those indulgent Laws
               Will not be now Vouchsafed, other Decrees
               Against thee are gon forth without recall;
               That Golden Sceptre which thou did reject
               Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and break
               Thy disobedience. Well thou did advise,
               Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly
               These wicked Tents devoted, least the wrath
               Impending, raging into sudden flame
               Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel
               His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire.
               Then who created thee lamenting learn,
               When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.

               
            
            
               O Heaven! that such resemblance of the Highest
               Should yet remain, where faith and realty
               Remain not; wherefore should not strength and might
               There fail where Virtue fails, or weakest prove
               Where boldest; though to sight unconquerable?
               His puissance, trusting in the almighty's aide,
               I mean to try, whose Reason I have tried
               Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just,
               That he who in debate of Truth hath won,
               Should win in Arms, in both disputes alike
               Victor; though brutish that contest and foul,
               When Reason hath to deal with force, yet so
               Most reason is that Reason overcome.

               
            
            
               Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reached
               The height of thy aspiring unopposed,
               The Throne of God unguarded, and his side
               Abandoned at the terror of thy Power
               Or potent tongue; foo, not to think how vain
               
               Against The Omnipotent to rise in Arms;
               Who out of smallest things could without end
               Have raised incessant Armies to defeat
               Thy folly; or with solitary hand
               Reaching beyond all limit at one blow
               Unaided could have finished thee, and whelmed
               Thy Legions under darkness; but thou see
               All are not of thy Train; there be who Faith
               Prefer, and Piety to God, though then
               To thee not visible, when I alone
               Seemed in thy World erroneous to dissent
               From all: my Sect thou see, now learn too late
               How few sometimes may know, when thousands err.
 Apostate, still thou erst, nor end
wilt find
               Of erring, from the path of truth remote:
               Unjustly thou depraves it with the name
               Of Servitude to serve whom God ordains,
               Or Nature; God and Nature bid the same,
               When he who rules is worthiest, and excels
               Them whom he governs.  This is servitude,
               To serve the unwise, or him who hath rebelled
               Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee,
               Thy self not free, but to thy self enthralled;
               Yet lewdly dare our ministering upbraid.
               Reign thou in Hell thy Kingdom, let me serve
               In Heaven God ever blessed, and his Divine
               Behests obey, worthiest to be obeyed,
               Yet Chains in Hell, not Realms expect: mean while
               From me returned, as erst thou said, from flight,
               This greeting on thy impious Crest receive.
               
                  