
               
            
            
               Sole partner and sole part of all these joys,
               Dearer thy self then all; needs must the power
               That made us, and for us this ample World
               Be infinitely good, and of his good
               As liberal and free as infinite,
               That raised us from the dust and placed us here
               In all this happiness, who at his hand
               Have nothing merited, nor can perform
               Aught whereof he hath need, he who requires
               From us no other service then to keep
               This one, this easy charge, of all the Trees
               In Paradise that bear delicious fruit
               So various, not to taste that only Tree
               Of knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life,
               So near grows Death to Life, what ere Death is,
               Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou know 
               
               God hath pronounced it death to taste that Tree,
               The only sign of our obedience left
               Among so many signs of power and rule
               Conferred upon us, and Dominion given
               Over all other Creatures that possess
               Earth, Air, and Sea.  Then let us not think hard
               One easy prohibition, who enjoy
               Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
               Unlimited of manifold delights:
               But let us ever praise him, and extol
               His bounty, following our delightful task
               To prune these growing Plants, and tend these Flours,
               Which were it toilsome, yet with thee were sweet.

Return fair Eve,
               Whom fliest thou? whom thou fliest, of him thou art,
               His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent
               Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart
               Substantial Life, to have thee by my side
               Henceforth an individual solace dear;
               Part of my Soul I seek thee, and thee claim
               My other half: 

 Fair Consort, the hour
               Of night, and all things now retired to rest
               Mind us of like repose, since God hath set
               Labour and rest, as day and night to men
               Successive, and the timely dew of sleep
               Now falling with soft slumbrous weight inclines
               Our eye-lids; other Creatures all day long
               Rove idle unemployed, and less need rest;
               Man hath his daily work of body or mind
               Appointed, which declares his Dignity, A
               nd the regard of Heaven on all his ways;
               While other Animals unactive range,
               And of their doings God takes no account.
               To morrow ere fresh Morning streak the East
               With first approach of light, we must be risen,
               And at our pleasant labour, to reform
               Yon flowery Arbors, yonder Allies green,
               Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown,
               That mock our scant manuring, and require
               More hands then ours to lop their wanton growth:
               Those Blossoms also, and those dropping Gumms, 
               
               That lie bestrowne unsightly and unsmooth,
               Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease;
               Mean while, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest.

               
               Daughter of God and Man, accomplished Eve,
               Those have their course to finish, round the Earth,
               By morrow Evening, and from Land to Land
               In order, though to Nations yet unborn,
               Ministering light prepared, they set and rise; 
               
               Least total darkness should by Night regain
               Her old possession, and extinguish life
               In Nature and all things, which these soft fires
               Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat
               Of various influence foment and warm,
               Temper or nourish, or in part shed down
               Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow
               On Earth, made hereby apter to receive
               Perfection from the Suns more potent Ray.
               These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
               Shine not in vain, nor think, though men were none,
               That heaven would want spectators, God want praise;
               Millions of spiritual Creatures walk the Earth
               Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:.
               All these with ceaseless praise his works behold
               Both day and night: how often from the steep
               Of echoing Hill or Thicket have we heard
               Celestial voices to the midnight air,
               Sole, or responsive each to others note
               Singing their great Creator: oft in bands
               While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk
               With Heavenly touch of instrumental sounds
               In full harmonic number joint, their songs
               Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.

 Awake
               My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
               Heavens last best gift, my ever new delight,
               Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field
               Calls us, we lose the prime, to mark how spring
               Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove,
               What drops the Myrrh, and what the balmy Reed,
               How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee
               Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.

               
            
            
               Best image of my self and dearer half,
               The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
               Affects me equally; nor can I like
               This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear; 
               
               Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
               Created pure. But know that in the Soul
               Are many lesser Faculties that serve
               Reason as chief; among these Fancy next
               Her office holds; of all external things,
               Which the five watchful Senses represent,
               She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,
               Which Reason joining or disjoining, frames
               All what we affirm or what deny, and call
               Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
               Into her private Cell when Nature rests,
               Oft in her absence mimic Fancy wakes
               To imitate her; but misjoining shapes,
               Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams,
               Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
               Some such resemblances methinks I find
               Of our last Evenings talk, in this thy dream,
               But with addition strange; yet be not sad.
               Evil into the mind of God or Man
               May come or go, so unproved, and leave
               No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
               That what in sleep thou did abhor to dream,
               Waking thou never wilt consent to do.
               Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks
               That wont to be more cheerful and serene
               Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World,
               And let us to our fresh employments rise
               Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours
               That open now their choicest bosomed smells
               Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.

               
            
            
               Haste hither Eve, and worth thy sight behold
               Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape
               Comes this way moving; seems another Morn
               Risen on mid-noon;  some great behest from Heaven
               To us perhaps he brings, and will voutchsafe
               This day to be our Guest. But go with speed,
               And what thy stores contain, bring forth and pour
               Abundance, fit to honour and receive
               Our Heavenly stranger; well we may afford
               Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow
               From large bestowed, where Nature multiplies
               Her fertile growth, and by disburd'ning grows
               More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.
 Native of Heaven,
for other  place
               None can then Heaven such glorious shape contain;
               Since by descending from the Thrones above,
               Those happy places thou has deigned a while
               To want, and honour these, voutchsafe with us
               Two only, who yet by soverign gift possess
               This spacious ground, in yonder shady Bower
               To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears
               To sit and taste, till this meridian heat
               Be over, and the Sun more cool decline. 
                  
 Heavenly stranger,
please to taste
               These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom
               All perfect good unmeasured out, descends,
               To us for food and for delight hath cause
               The Earth to yield; unsavoury food perhaps
               To spiritual Natures; only this I know,
               That one Celestial Father gives to all. 
                  
                  

               
            
            
               Inhabitant with God, now know I well
               Thy favour, in this honour done to man,
               Under whose lowly roof thou has Vouchsafed
               To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste,
               Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,
               As that more willingly thou could not seem
               As Heavens high feasts to have fed: yet what compare?
 O favourable spirit, propitious
guest,
               Well has thou taught the way that might direct
               Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set
               From center to circumference, whereon
               In contemplation of created things
               By steps we may ascend to God. But say,
               What meant that caution joint,
if ye be found
               
               
                  Obedient? can we
want obedience then
               To him, or possibly his love desert
               Who formed us from the dust, and placed us here
               Full to the utmost measure of what bliss
               Human desires can seek or apprehend?

Thy words
               Attentive, and with more delighted ear,
               Divine instructor, I have heard, then when
               Cherubic Songs by night from neighbouring Hills
               Aerial Music send: nor knew I not
               To be both will and deed created free;
               Yet that we never shall forget to love
               Our maker, and obey him whose command
               Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts
               Assured me, and still assure: though what thou tells
               Hath past in Heaven, some doubt within me move,
               But more desire to hear, if thou consent,
               The full relation, which must needs be strange,
               Worthy of Sacred silence to be heard;
               And we have yet large day, for scarce the Sun
               Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins
               His other half in the great Zone of Heaven.

               
            
            
               Great things, and full of wonder in our ears,
               Far differing from this World, thou has revealed
               Divine interpreter, by favour sent
               Down from the Empyrean to forewarn
               Us timely of what might else have bin our loss,
               Unknown, which human knowledge could not reach:
               For which to the infinitely Good we owe
               
               Immortal thanks, and his admonishment
               Receive with solemn purpose to observe
               Immutably his soverign will, the end
               Of what we are.  But since thou has Vouchsafed
               Gently for our instruction to impart
               Things above Earthly thought, which yet concerned
               Our knowing, as to highest wisdom seemed,
               Deign to descend now lower, and relate
               What may no less perhaps avail us known,
               How first began this Heaven which we behold
               Distant so high, with moving Fires adorned
               Innumerable, and this which yields or fills
               All space, the ambient Air wide interfus'd
               Embracing round this florid Earth, what cause
               Moved the Creator in his holy Rest
               Through all Eternity so late to build
               In Chaos, and the work begun, how soon
               Absolved, if unforbid thou may unfold
               What wee, not to explore the secrets ask
               Of his Eternal Empire, but the more
               To magnify his works, the more we know.
               And the great Light of Day yet wants to run
               Much of his Race though steep, suspense in Heaven
               Held by thy voice, thy potent voice he hears,
               And longer will delay to hear thee tell
               His Generation, and the rising Birth
               Of Nature from the unapparent Deep:
               Or if the Star of Evening and the Moon
               Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring
               Silence, and Sleep listening to thee will watch,
               Or we can bid his absence, till thy Song
               End, and dismiss thee ere the Morning shine.
 What thanks sufficient, or what
recompense
            Equal have I to render thee, Divine
            Historian, who thus largely has allayed
            The thirst I had of knowledge, and Vouchsafed
            
            This friendly condescension to relate
            Things else by me unsearchable, now heard
            With wonder, but delight, and, as is due,
            With glory attributed to the high
            Creator; something yet of doubt remains,
            Which only thy solution can resolve.
            When I behold this goodly Frame, this World
            Of Heaven and Earth consisting, and compute,
            Their magnitudes, this Earth a spot, a grain,
            An Atom, with the Firmament compared
            And all her numbered Stars, that seem to roll
            Spaces incomprehensible (for such
            Their distance argues and their swift return
            Diurnal) merely to officiate light
            Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot,
            One day and night; in all their vast survey
            Useless besides, reasoning I oft admire,
            How Nature wise and frugal could commit
            Such disproportions, with superfluous hand
            So many nobler Bodies to create,
            Greater so manifold to this one use,
            For aught appears, and on their Orbs impose
            Such restless revolution day by day
            Repeated, while the sedentary Earth,
            That better might with far less compass move,
            Served by more noble then her self, attains
            Her end without least motion, and receives,
            As Tribute such a sumless journey brought
            Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light;
            Speed, to describe whose swiftness Number fails. 
 How fully has thou satisfied me,
pure
               Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene,
               And freed from intricacies, taught to live,
               The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts
               To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which
               God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
               And not molest us, unless we our selves
               Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain.
               But apt the Mind or Fancy is to roave
               Unchecked, and of her roving is no end;
               Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn,
               That not to know at large of things remote
               From use, obscure and subtle, but to know
               That which before us lies in daily life,
               Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume,
               Or emptiness, or fond impertinence,
               And renders us in things that most concern
               Unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek.
               Therefore from this high pitch let us descend
               A lower flight, and speak of things at hand
               Useful, whence happily mention may arise
               Of something not unseasonable to ask
               By sufferance, and thy wonted favour deigned.
               Thee I have heard relating what was don
               Ere my remembrance: now hear me relate
               My Story, which perhaps thou has not heard;
               And Day is yet not spent; till then thou see
               How subtly to detain thee I devise,
               Inviting thee to hear while I relate,
               Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply:
               For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven,
               And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear
               Then Fruits of Palm-tree pleasantest to thirst
               
               And hunger both, from labour, at the hour
               Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill,
               Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine
               Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety.
               
                  
 For Man to tell how human Life began
               Is hard; for who himself beginning knew?
               Desire with thee still longer to converse
               Induced me.  As new waked from soundest sleep
               Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid
               In Balmy Sweat, which with his Beams the Sun
               Soon dried, and on the reeking moisture fed.
               Strait toward Heaven my wondering Eyes I turned,
               And gazed a while the ample Sky, till raised
               By quick instinctive motion up I sprung,
               As thitherward endeavouring, and upright
               Stood on my feet; about me round I saw
               Hill, Dale, and shady Woods, and sunny Plains,
               And liquid Lapse of murmuring Streams; by these,
               Creatures that livd, and moved, and walked, or flew,
               Birds on the branches warbling; all things smiled,
               With fragrance and with joy my heart overflowed.
               My self I then perused, and Limb by Limb
               Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran
               With supple joints, and lively vigour led:
               But who I was, or where, or from what cause,
               Knew not; to speak I tried, and forthwith spake
               My Tongue obeyed and readily could name
               What ever I saw.  Thou Sun, said I, fair Light,
               And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay,
               Ye Hills and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plains,
               And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell,
               Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here?
               Not of my self; by some great Maker then,
               In goodness and in power pr??eminent;
               Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,
               
               From whom I have that thus I move and live,
               And feel that I am happier then I know.
               While thus I called, and strayed I knew not whither,
               From where I first drew Air, and first beheld
               This happy Light, when answer none returned,
               On a green shady Bank profuse of Flours
               Pensive I sate me down; there gentle sleep
               First found me, and with soft oppression seized
               My drowsed sense, untroubled, though I thought
               I then was passing to my former state
               Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve:
               When suddenly stood at my Head a dream,
               Whose inward apparition gently moved
               My fancy to believe I yet had being,
               And lived: One came, methought, of shape Divine,
               And said, 
 So saying, by the hand he took me
raised,
               And over Fields and Waters, as in Air
               Smooth sliding without step, last led me up
               A woody Mountain; whose high top was plain,
               A Circuit wide, enclosed, with goodliest Trees
               Planted, with Walks, and Bowers, that what I saw
               Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemed.  Each Tree
               Load'n with fairest Fruit that hung to the Eye
               Tempting, stirred in me sudden appetite
               To pluck and eat; whereat I waked, and found
               Before mine Eyes all real, as the dream
               Had lively shadowed: Here had new begun
               My wandering, had not he who was my Guide
               Up hither, from among the Trees appeared
               Presence Divine.  Rejoicing, but with awe
               
               In adoration at his feet I fell
               Submiss: he reared me, and 
 Said mildly,
 Sternly he
pronounced
               The rigid interdiction, which resounds
               Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice
               Not to incur; but soon his clear aspect
               Returned and gracious purpose thus renewed.
               
                  
 As thus he spake, each Bird and
Beast behold
               Approaching two and two, These cowering low
               With blandishment, each Bird stooped on his wing.
               I named them, as they passed, and understood
               Their Nature, with such knowledge God endued
               My sudden apprehension: but in these
               I found not what me thought I wanted still;
               And to the Heavenly vision thus presumed.
               
            
            
               O by what Name, for thou above all these,
               Above mankind, or aught then mankind higher,
               Surpassest far my naming, how may I
               Adore thee, Author of this Universe,
               And all this good to man, for whose well being
               So amply, and with hands so liberal
               Thou has provided all things: but with me
               I see not who partakes.  In solitude
               What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
               Or all enjoying, what contentment find?
               Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright,
               As with a smile more brightened, thus replied. 
               
                  
 So spake the Universal Lord, and
seemed
               So ordering.  I with leave of speech implored,
               And humble deprecation thus replied.
            
            
               Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power,
               My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
               has thou not made me here thy substitute,
               And these inferior far beneath me set?
               
               Among unequals what society
               Can sort, what harmony or true delight?
               Which must be mutual, in proportion due
               Given and received; but in disparity
               The one intense, the other still remiss
               Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove
               Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak
               Such as I seek, fit to participate
               All rational delight, wherein the brute
               Cannot be human consort; they rejoice
               Each with their kind, Lion with Lioness;
               So fitly them in pairs thou has combined;
               Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Foul
               So well converse, nor with the Ox the Ape;
               Worse then can Man with Beast, and least of all.
               Where to the almighty answered, not displeased. 
               
                  
 He ceased, I lowly answered. To
attain
               The height and depth of thy Eternal ways
               All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things;
               Thou in thy self art perfect, and in thee
               Is no deficiency found; not so is Man,
               
               But in degree, the cause of his desire
               By conversation with his like to help,
               Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
               Should propagate, already infinite;
               And through all numbers absolute, though One;
               But Man by number is to manifest
               His single imperfection, and beget
               Like of his like, his Image multiplied,
               In unity defective, which requires
               Collateral love, and dearest amity.
               Thou in thy secrecy although alone,
               Best with thy self accompanied, seek not
               Social communication, yet so pleased,
               Can raise thy Creature to what height thou wilt
               Of Union or Communion, deified;
               I by conversing cannot these erect
               From prone, nor in their ways complacence find.
               Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
               Permissive, and acceptance found, which gained
               This answer from the gracious voice Divine. 

               
            
            
               He ended, or I heard no more, for now
               My earthly by his Heavenly overpowered,
               Which it had long stood under, strained to the height
               In that celestial Colloquy sublime,
               As with an object that excels the sense,
               Dazzle d and spent, sunk down, and sought repair
               Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
               By Nature as in aide, and closed mine eyes.
               Mine eyes he closed, but open left the Cell
               Of Fancy my internal sight, by which
               Abstract as in a trance methought I saw,
               Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
               Still glorious before whom awake I stood;
               Who stooping opened my left side, and took
               From thence a Rib, with cordial spirits warm,
               And Life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound,
               But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:
               The Rib he formed and fashioned with his hands;
               Under his forming hands a Creature grew,
               Manlike, but different Sex, so lovely fair,
               That what seemed fair in all the World, seemed now
               Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained
               And in her looks, which from that time infused
               Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
               And into all things from her Air inspired
               The spirit of love and amorous delight.
               She disappeared, and left me dark, I waked
               To find her, or for ever to deplore
               Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
               When out of hope, behold her, not far off,
               Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned
               With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
               To make her amiable: On she came,
               
               Led by her Heavenly Maker, though unseen,
               And guided by his voice, nor uninformed
               Of nuptial Sanctity and marriage Rites:
               Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her Eye,
               In every gesture dignity and love.
               I overjoyed could not forbear aloud.
            
            
               This turn hath made amends; thou has fulfilled
               Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,
               Giver of all things fair, but fairest this
               Of all thy gifts, nor enviest.  I now see
               Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my Flesh, my Self
               Before me; Woman is her Name, of Man
               Extracted; for this cause he shall forgo
               Father and Mother, and to his Wife adhere;
               And they shall be one Flesh, one Heart, one Soul.
            
            
               She heard me thus, and though divinely brought,
               Yet Innocence and Virgin Modesty,
               Her virtue and the conscience of her worth,
               That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
               Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retired,
               The more desirable, or to say all,
               Nature her self, though pure of sinful thought,
               Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turned;
               I followed her, she what was Honour knew,
               And with obsequious Majesty approved
               My pleaded reason.  To the Nuptial Bower
               I led her blushing like the Morn: all Heaven,
               And happy Constellations on that hour
               Shed their selectest influence; the Earth
               Gave sign of gratulation, and each Hill;
               Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales and gentle Aires
               Whispered it to the Woods, and from their wings
               Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicy Shrub,
               Disporting, till the amorous Bird of Night
               
               Sung Spousal, and bid haste the Evening Star
               On his Hill top, to light the bridal Lamp.
               Thus I have told thee all my State, and brought
               My Story to the sum of earthly bliss
               Which I enjoy, and must confess to find
               In all things else delight indeed, but such
               As used or not, works in the mind no change,
               Nor vehement desire, these delicacies
               I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits, and Flours,
               Walks, and the melody of Birds; but here
               Far otherwise, transported I behold,
               Transported touch; here passion first I felt,
               Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else
               Superior and unmoved, here only weak
               Against the charm of Beauties powerful glance.
               Or Nature failed in me, and left some part
               Not proof enough such Object to sustain,
               Or from my side subducting, took perhaps
               More then enough; at least on her bestowed
               Too much of Ornament, in outward show
               Elaborate, of inward less exact.
               For well I understand in the prime end
               Of Nature her th'inferiour, in the mind
               And inward Faculties, which most excel,
               In outward also her resembling less
               His Image who made both, and less expressing
               The character of that Dominion given
               O'er other Creatures; yet when I approach
               Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
               And in her self complete, so well to know
               Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
               Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest, best;
               All higher knowledge in her presence falls
               Degraded, Wisdom in discourse with her
               
               Looses discountenanced, and like folly shows;
               Authority and Reason on her wait,
               As one intended first, not after made
               Occasionally; and to consummate all,
               Greatness of mind and nobleness their seat
               Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
               About her, as a guard Angelic placed.
               
                  
 Neither her out-side formed so fair,
nor aught
               In procreation common to all kinds
               (Though higher of the genial Bed by far,
               And with mysterious reverence I deem)
               So much delights me as those graceful acts,
               Those thousand decencies that daily flow
               From all her words and actions mixed with Love
               And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
               Union of Mind, or in us both one Soul;
               Harmony to behold in wedded pair
               More grateful then harmonious sound to the ear.
               Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose
               What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
               Who meet with various objects, from the sense
               Variously representing; yet still free
               Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
               To love thou blanket me not, for love thou say
               Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide;
               Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask;
               Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their Love
               Express they, by looks only, or do they mix
               Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch? 
 Since to
part,
               Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal Messenger,
               Sent from whose soverign goodness I adore.
               Gentle to me and affable hath been
               Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
               With grateful Memory: thou to mankind
               Be good and friendly still, and oft return. 
 Sole Eve, Associate sole,
to me beyond
               Compare above all living Creatures dear,
               Well has thou motioned, well thy thoughts employed
               How we might best fulfil the work which here
               God hath assigned us, nor of me shalt pass
               Unprais'd: for nothing lovelier can be found
               In Woman, then to study household good,
               And good works in her Husband to promote.
               Yet not so strictly hath our Lord imposed
               Labour, as to debar us when we need
               Refreshment, whether food, or talk between,
               Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse
               Of looks and smiles, for smiles from Reason flow,
               To brute denied, and are of Love the food,
               Love not the lowest end of human life.
               For not to irksome toil, but to delight
               He made us, and delight to Reason joined.
               These paths &amp; Bowers doubt not but our joint hands
               Will keep from Wilderness with ease, as wide
               As we need walk, till younger hands ere long
               Assist us: But if much converse perhaps
               Thee satiate, to short absence I could yield.
               For solitude sometimes is best society,
               And short retirement urges sweet return.
               But other doubt possesses me, least harm
               Befall thee severed from me; for thou know
               What hath bin warned us, what malicious Foe
               Envying our happiness, and of his own
               Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame
               By sly assault; and somwhere nigh at hand
               Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find
               His wish and best advantage, us asunder,
               Hopeless to circumvent us joined, where each
               
               To other speedy aide might lend at need;
               Whether his first design be to withdraw
               Our fealty from God, or to disturb
               Conjugal Love, then which perhaps no bliss
               Enjoyed by us excites his envy more;
               Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side
               That gave thee being, still shades thee and protects.
               The Wife, where danger or dishonour lurks,
               Safest and seemliest by her Husband stays,
               Who guards her, or with her the worst endures.
 Daughter of God and Man, immortal
Eve,
               For such thou art, from sin and blame entire:
               Not diffident of thee do I dissuade
               
               Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid
               The attempt it self, intended by our Foe.
               For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses
               The tempted with dishonour foul, supposed
               Not incorruptible of Faith, not prooff
               Against temptation: thou thy self with scorn
               And anger would resent the offered wrong,
               Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then,
               If such affront I labour to avert
               From thee alone, which on us both at once
               The Enemy, though bold, will hardly dare,
               Or daring, first on me th'assault shall light.
               Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn;
               Subtle he needs must be, who could seduce
               Angels, nor think superfluous others aid.
               I from the influence of thy looks receive
               Access in every Virtue, in thy sight
               More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
               Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on,
               Shame to be overcome or overreached
               Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite.
               Why should not thou like sense within thee feel
               When I am present, and thy trial choose
               With me, best witness of thy Virtue tried.
 O Woman, best are all things as the
will
               Of God ordained them, his creating hand
               Nothing imperfect or deficient left
               Of all that he Created, much less Man,
               Or aught that might his happy State secure,
               Secure from outward force; within himself
               The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
               Against his will he can receive no harm.
               But God left free the Will, for what obeys
               Reason, is free, and Reason he made right,
               But bid her well beware, and still erect,
               Least by some fair appearing good surprised
               She dictate false, and misinform the Will
               To do what God expressly hath forbid,
               Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoins,
               That I should mind thee oft, and mind thou me.
               Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve,
               Since Reason not impossibly may meet
               Some specious object by the Foe suborned,
                  
               
               And fall into deception unaware,
               Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned.
               Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
               Were better, and most likely if from me
               Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
               Would thou approve thy constancy, approve
               First thy obedience; the other who can know,
               Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
               But if thou think, trial unsought may find
               Us both securer then thus warned thou seem,
               Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more;
               Go in thy native innocence, rely
               On what thou has of virtue, summon all,
               For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.

               
            
            
               O fairest of Creation, last and best
               Of all Gods works, Creature in whom excelled
               Whatever can to sight or thought be formed,
               Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!
               How art thou lost, how on a sudden lost,
               Defaced, deflowered, and now to Death devote?
               Rather how has thou yielded to transgress
               The strict forbiddings, how to violate
               The sacred Fruit forbidden! some cursed fraud
               Of Enemy hath beguiled thee, yet unknown,
                  
               
               And me with thee hath ruined, for with thee
               Certain my resolution is to Die;
               How can I live without thee, how forgo
               Thy sweet Converse and Love so dearly joined,
               To live again in these wilde Woods forlorn?
               Should God create another Eve, and I
               Another Rib afford, yet loss of thee
               Would never from my heart; no no, I feel
               The Link of Nature draw me: Flesh of Flesh,
               Bone of my Bone thou art, and from thy State
               Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.
               
                  

               
            
            
               Bold deed thou has presumed, adventurous Eve,
               And peril great provoked, who thus hath dared
               Had it been only coveting to Eye
               That sacred Fruit, sacred to abstinence,
               Much more to taste it under ban to touch.
               But past who can recall, or don undo?
               Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate, yet so
               Perhaps thou shalt not Die, perhaps the Fact
               Is not so heinous now, foretasted Fruit,
               Profaned first by the Serpent, by him first
               Made common and unhallowed ere our taste;
               Nor yet on him found deadly, he yet lives,
               Lives, as thou said, and gains to live as Man
               Higher degree of Life, inducement strong
               To us, as likely tasting to attain
               Proportional ascent, which cannot be
               But to be Gods, or Angels Demigods.
               Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,
               Though threatening, will in earnest so destroy
               
               Us his prime Creatures, dignified so high,
               Set over all his Works, which in our Fall,
               For us created, needs with us must fail,
               Dependent made; so God shall uncreate,
               Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour loose,
               Not well conceived of God, who though his Power
               Creation could repeat, yet would be loath
               Us to abolish, least the Adversary
               Triumph and say; 
 Matter of scorn, not to be given
the Foe,
               However I with thee have fixed my Lot,
               Certain to undergo like doom, if Death
               Consort with thee, Death is to me as Life;
               So forcible within my beart I feel
               The Bond of Nature draw me to my own,
               My own in thee, for what thou art is mine;
               Our State cannot be severed, we are one,
               One Flesh; to loose thee were to loose my self.

               
            
            
               
                  Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste,
               And elegant, of Sapience no small part,
               Since to each meaning savour we apply,
               And Palate call judicious; I the praise
               Yield thee, so well this day thou has purveyed.
               Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained
               From this delightful Fruit, nor known till now
               True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be
               In things to us forbidden, it might be wished,
               For this one Tree had bin forbidden ten.
               But come, so well refreshed, now let us play,
               As meet is, after such delicious Fare;
               For never did thy Beauty since the day
               I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned
               With all perfections, so inflame my sense
               With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now
               Then ever, bounty of this virtuous Tree.

               
            
            
               
                  Eve, in evil hour thou did give ear
               To that false Worm, of whomsoever taught
               To counterfeit Mans voice, true in our Fall,
               False in our promised Rising; since our Eyes
               Opened we find indeed, and find we know
               Both Good and Evil, Good lost, and Evil got,
               Bad Fruit of Knowledge, if this be to know,
               Which leaves us naked thus, of Honour void,
               Of Innocence, of Faith, of Purity,
               
               Our wonted Ornaments now soiled and stained,
               And in our Faces evident the signs
               Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store;
               Even shame, the last of evils; of the first
               Be sure then.  How shall I behold the face
               Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy
               And rapture so oft beheld? those heavenly shapes
               Will dazzle now this earthly, with their blaze
               Insufferably bright.  O might I here
               In solitude live savage, in some glade
               Obscured, where highest Woods impenetrable
               To Star or Sun-light, spread their umbrage broad
               And brown as Evening: Cover me ye Pines,
               Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
               Hide me, where I may never see them more.
               But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
               What best may from the present serve to hide
               The Parts of each for other, that seem most
               To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen,
               Some Tree whose broad smooth Leaves together sowed,
               And girded on our loins, may cover round
               Those middle parts, that this new summer, Shame,
               There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.

               
            
            
               Would thou had hearkened to my words, and stayed
               With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
               Desire of wandering this unhappy Morn,
               I know not whence possessed thee; we had then
               Remained still happy, not as now, despoiled
               Of all our good, shamed, naked, miserable.
               Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve
               The Faith they owe; when earnestly they seek
               Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail.
 Is this the Love, is this the
recompense
               Of mine to thee, ungrateful Eve, expressed
               Immutable when thou were lost, not I,
               Who might have lived and joyed immortal bliss,
               Yet willingly chose rather Death with thee:
               And am I now upbraided, as the cause
               Of thy transgressing? not enough severe,
               It seems, in thy restraint: what could I more?
               I warned thee, I admonished thee, foretold
               The danger, and the lurking Enemy
               That lay in wait; beyond this had bin force,
               And force upon free will hath here no place.
               But confidence then bore thee on, secure
               Either to meet no danger, or to find
               Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps
               
               I also erred in overmuch admiring
               What seemed in thee so perfect, that I thought
               No evil dared attempt thee, but I rue
               That error now, which is become my crime,
               And thou the Accuser.  Thus it shall befall
               Him who to worth in Women overtrusting
               Lets her will rule; restraint she will not brook,
               And left to her self, if evil thence ensue,
               She first his weak indulgence will accuse.

               
            
            
               I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice
               
               Afraid, being naked, hid my self. 
 O Heaven! in evil strait this day I
stand
               Before my judge, either to undergo
               My self the total Crime, or to accuse
               My other self, the partner of my life;
               Whose failing, while her Faith to me remains,
               I should conceal, and not expose to blame
               By my complaint; but strict necessity
               Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
               Least on my head both sin and punishment,
               However insupportable, be all
               Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou
               Would easily detect what I conceal.
               This Woman whom thou made to be my help,
               And gave me as thy perfect gift, so good,
               So fit, so acceptable, so Divine,
               That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
               And what she did, whatever in it self,
               Her doing seemed to justify the deed;
               She gave me of the Tree, and I did eat.

               
            
            
               O miserable of happy! is this the end
               Of this new glorious World, and me so late
               The Glory of that Glory, who now become
               Accursed of blessed, hide me from the face
               Of God, whom to behold was then my height
               Of happiness: yet well, if here would end
               The misery, I deserved it, and would bear
               My own deservings; but this will not serve;
                  
               
               All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
               Is propagated curse.  O voice once heard
               Delightfully, 
 Now death to hear! for what can I
increase
               Or multiply, but curses on my head?
               Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling
               The evil on him brought by me, will curse
               My Head,  Ill fare our
Ancestor impure,
               For this we may thank Adam; 
                  

but his thanks
               Shall be the execration; so besides
               Mine own that bide upon me, all from me
               Shall with a fierce reflux on me redound,
               On me as on their natural center light
               Heavy, though in their place.  O fleeting joys
               Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
               Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay
               To mould me Man, did I solicit thee
               From darkness to promote me, or here place
               In this delicious Garden? as my Will
               Concurred not to my being, it were but right
               And equal to reduce me to my dust,
               Desirous to resign, and render back
               All I received, unable to perform
               Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
               The good I sought not.  To the loss of that,
               Sufficient penalty, why has thou added
               The sense of endless woes? inexplicable
               Thy justice seems; yet to say truth, too late,
               I thus contest; then should have been refused
               Those terms whatever, when they were proposed:
               Thou did accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,
               Then cavil the conditions? and though God
               Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son
               Prove disobedient, and reproved, retort,
               
               Wherefore did thou beget me? I sought it not:
               Would thou admit for his contempt of thee
               That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,
               But Natural necessity begot.
               God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
               To serve him, thy reward was of his grace,
               Thy punishment then justly is at his Will.
               Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair,
               That dust I am, and shall to dust return:
               O welcome hour whenever! why delays
               His hand to execute what his Decree
               Fixed on this day? why do I overlive,
               Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out
               To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet
               Mortality my sentence, and be Earth
               Insensible, how glad would lay me down
               As in my Mothers lap? there I should rest
               And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more
               Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse
               To me and to my offspring would torment me
               With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt
               Pursues me still, least all I cannot die,
               Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man
               Which God inspired, cannot together perish
               With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave,
               Or in some other dismal place who knows
               But I shall die a living Death? O thought
               Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath
               Of Life that sinned; what dies but what had life
               And sin? the Body properly hath neither.
               All of me then shall die: let this appease
               The doubt, since humane reach no further knows.
               For though the Lord of all be infinite,
               Is his wrath also? be it, man is not so,
                  
               
               But mortal doomed.  How can he exercise
               Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end?
               Can he make deathless Death? that were to make
               Strange contradiction, which to God himself
               Impossible is held, as Argument
               Of weakness, not of Power.  Will he, draw out,
               For angers sake, finite to infinite
               In punished man, to satisfy his rigour
               Satisfied never; that were to extend
               His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law,
               By which all Causes else according still
               To the reception of their matter act,
               Not to th'extent of their own Sphere.  But say
               That Death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
               Bereaving sense, but endless misery
               From this day onward, which I feel begun
               Both in me, and without me, and so last
               To perpetuity; Ay me, that fear
               Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
               On my defenceless head; both Death and I
               Am found Eternal, and incorporate both,
               Nor I on my part single, in me all
               Posterity stands cursed: Fair Patrimony
               That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able
               To waste it all my self, and leave ye none!
               So disinherited how would ye bless
               Me now your curse! Ah, why should all mankind
               For one mans fault thus guiltless be condemned,
               If guiltless? But from me what can proceed,
               But all corrupt, both Mind and Will depraved,
               Not to do only, but to will the same
               With me? how can they then acquitted stand
               In sight of God? Him after all Disputes
               Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,
               
               And reasoning, though through Mazes, lead me still
               But to my own conviction: first and last
               On me, me only, as the source and spring
               Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;
               So might the wrath.  Fond wish! could thou support
               That burden heavier then the Earth to bear
               Then all the World much heavier, though divided
               With that bad Woman? Thus what thou desire
               And what thou fear, alike destroys all hope
               Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
               Beyond all past example and future,
               To Satan only like both crime and doom.
               O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears
               And horrors has thou driven me; out of which
               I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!

               
            
            
               Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best
               Befits thee with him leagued, thy self as false
               And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape,
               Like his, and colour Serpentine may show
               Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee
               Henceforth; least that too heavenly form, pretended
               To hellish falsehood, snare them.  But for thee
               I had persisted happy, had not thy pride
               And wandering vanity, when lest was safe,
               Rejected my forewarning, and disdained
               Not to be trusted, longing to be seen
               Though by the Devil himself, him overweening
               To over-reach, but with the Serpent meeting
               Fooled and beguiled, by him thou, I by thee,
               To trust thee from my side, imagined wise,
               Constant, mature, proof against all assaults,
               And understood not all was but a show
               Rather then solid virtue, all but a Rib
               Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
               More to the part sinister from me drawn,
               Well if thrown out, as supernumerary
               To my just number found.  O why did God,
               Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven
               With Spirits Masculine, create at last
               This novelty on Earth, this fair defect
               Of Nature, and not fill the World at once
               With Men as Angels without Feminine,
               Or find some other way to generate
               Mankind? this mischief had not then befallen,
               And more that shall befall, innumerable
               Disturbances on Earth through Female snares,
               
               And straight conjunction with this Sex: for either
               He never shall find out fit Mate, but such
               As some misfortune brings him, or mistake,
               Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
               Through her perverseness, but shall see her gained
               By a far worse, or if she love, withheld
               By Parents, or his happiest choice too late
               Shall meet, already linked and Wedlock-bound
               To a fell Adversary, his hate or shame:
               Which infinite calamity shall cause
               To Humane life, and household peace confound.

               
            
            
               Unwary, and too desirous, as before,
               So now of what thou know not, who desire
               The punishment all on thy self; alas,
               Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain
               His full wrath whose thou feels as yet lest part,
               And my displeasure bear so ill.  If Prayers
               Could alter high Decrees, I to that place
               Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
               That on my head all might be visited,
               Thy frailty and infirmer Sex forgiven,
               To me committed and by me exposed.
               But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame
               Each other, blamed enough elsewhere, but strive
               In offices of Love, how we may lighten
               Each others burden in our share of woe;
               Since this days Death denounced, if ought I see,
               Will prove no sudden, but a slow-pac't evil,
               A long days dying to augment our pain,
               And to our Seed (O hapless Seed!) derived.
                  

               
            
            
               
                  Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
               To argue in thee something more sublime
               And excellent then what thy mind contemns;
               But self-destruction therefore sought, refutes
               That excellence thought in thee, and implies,
               Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
               For loss of life and pleasure overlov'd.
               Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
               Of misery, so thinking to evade
               The penalty pronounced, doubt not but God
               Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire then so
               To be forestalled; much more I fear least Death
               So snatched will not exempt us from the pain
               We are by doom to pay; rather such acts
               Of contumacy will provoke the highest
               To make death in us live: Then let us seek
               Some safer resolution, which methinks
               I have in view, calling to mind with heed
               Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed shall bruise
               The Serpents head; piteous amends, unless
               
               Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe
               
                  Satan, who in the Serpent hath contrived
               Against us this deceit: to crush his head
               Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost
               By death brought on our selves, or childless days
               Resolved, as thou propose; so our Foe
               Shall escape his punishment ordained, and wee
               Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
               No more be mentioned then of violence
               Against our selves, and wilful barrenness,
               That cuts us off from hope, and savours only
               Rancor and pride, impatience and despite,
               Reluctance against God and his just yoke
               Laid on our Necks.  Remember with what mild
               And gracious temper he both heard and judged
               Without wrath or reviling; wee expected
               Immediate dissolution, which we thought
               Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee
               Pains only in Child-bearing were foretold,
               And bringing forth, soon recompense with joy,
               Fruit of thy Womb: On me the Curse aslope
               Glanced on the ground, with labour I must earn
               My bread; what harm? Idleness had bin worse;
               My labour will sustain me; and least Cold
               Or Heat should injure us, his timely care
               Hath unbesaught provided, and his hands
               Clothed us unworthy, pitying while he judged;
               How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
               Be open, and his heart to pity incline,
               And teach us further by what means to shun
               Th'inclement Seasons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow,
               Which now the Sky with various Face begins
               To show us in this Mountain, while the Winds
               Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks
               
               Of these fair spreading Trees; which bids us seek
               Some better shroud, some better warmth to cherish
               Our Limbs benumbed, ere this diurnal Star
               Leave cold the Night, how we his gathered beams
               Reflected, may with matter sere foment,
               Or by collision of two bodies grind
               The Air attrite to Fire, as late the Clouds
               Jostling or pushed with Winds rude in their shock
               Tine the slant Lightning, whose thwart flame driven down
               Kindles the gummy bark of Fur or Pine,
               And sends a comfortable heat from far,
               Which might supply the Sun: such Fire to use,
               And what may else be remedy or cure
               To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,
               He will instruct us praying, and of Grace
               Beseeching him, so as we need not fear
               To pass commodiously this life, sustained
               By him with many comforts, till we end
               In dust, our final rest and native home.
               What better can we do, then to the place
               Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall
               Before him reverent, and there confess
               Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears
               Watering the ground, and with our sighs the Air
               Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
               Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek.
               Undoubtedly he will relent and turn
               From his displeasure; in whose look serene,
               When angry most he seemed and most severe,
               What else but favour, grace, and mercy shone?

               
            
            
               
                  Eve, easily may Faith admit, that all
               
               The good which we enjoy, from Heaven descends;
               But that from us ought should ascend to Heaven
               So prevalent as to concern the mind
               Of God high-blest, or to incline his will,
               Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer,
               Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne
               Even to the Seat of God.  For since I sought
               By Prayer th'offended Deity to appease,
               Kneeled and before him humbled all my heart,
               Methought I saw him placable and mild,
               Bending his ear; persuasion in me grew
               That I was heard with favour; peace returned
               Home to my Breast, and to my memory
               His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe;
               Which then not minded in dismay, yet now
               Assures me that the bitterness of death
               Is past, and we shall live.  Whence Hail to thee,
               
                  Eve rightly called, Mother of all Mankind,
               Mother of all things living, since by thee
               Man is to live, and all things live for Man.

               
            
            
               O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh,
               Which Heaven by these mute signs in Nature shows
               Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn
               Us happily too secure of our discharge
               From penalty, because from death released
               Some days; how long, and what till then our life,
               Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust,
               And thither must return and be no more.
               Why else this double object in our fight
               Of flight pursued in the air and ore the ground
               One way the self-same hour? why in the East
               Darkness ere Days mid-course, and Morning light
               More orient in yon Western Cloud that draws
               O'er the blew Firmament a radiant white,
               And slow descends, with something heavenly fraught.

               
            
            
               
                  Eve, now expect great tidings, which perhaps
               Of us will soon determine, or impose
               New Laws to be observed; for I descry
               From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill
               One of the heavenly Host, and by his Gate
               None of the meanest, some great Potentate
               Or of the Thrones above, such Majesty
               Invests him coming? yet not terrible,
               That I should fear, nor sociably mild,
               As Raphael, that I should much confide,
               But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend,
               With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
               He ended; and The Arch-Angel soon drew nigh,
               Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man
               Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Arms
               A military Vest of purple flowed
               Livelier then Melib??an, or the grain
               Of Sarra, worn by Kings and Hero's old
                  
               
               In time of Truce; lris had dipped the wooff;
               His starry Helm unbuckled showed him prime
               In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side
               As in a glistening Zodiac hung the Sword,
               Satan's dire dread, and in his hand the Spear.
               
                  Adam bowd low, he Kingly from his State
               Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.

               
            
            
               Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named
               Of them the Highest, for such of shape may seem
               Prince above Princes, gently has thou told
               Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
               And in performing end us; what besides
               Of sorrow and dejection and despair
               Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring,
               Departure from this happy place, our sweet
               Recess, and only consolation left
               Familiar to our eyes, all places else
               Inhospitable appear and desolate,
               Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer
               Incessant I could hope to change the will
               Of him who all things can, I would not cease
               To weary him with my assiduous cries:
               But prayer against his absolute Decree
                  
               
               No more avails then breath against the wind,
               Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth:
               Therefore to his great bidding I submit.
               This most afflicts me, that departing hence,
               As from his face I shall be hid, deprived
               His blessed countenance; here I could frequent,
               With worship, place by place where he vouchsafed
               Presence Divine, and to my Sons relate;
               On this Mount he appeared, under this Tree
               Stood visible, among these Pines his voice
               I heard, here with him at this Fountain talked:
               So many grateful Altars I would rear
               Of grassy Turf, and pile up every Stone
               Of lustre from the brook, in memory,
               Or monument to Ages, and thereon
               Offer sweet smelling Gumms and Fruits and Flours:
               In yonder nether World where shall I seek
               His bright appearances, or foot step-trace?
               For though I fled him angry, yet recalled
               To life prolonged and promised Race, I now
               Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts
               Of glory, and far off his steps adore.
 Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide,
the path
               Thou lead me, and to the hand of Heaven submit,
               However chast'ning, to the evil turn
               My obvious breast, arming to overcome
               By suffering, and earn rest from labour won,
               If so I may attain. 

               
            
            
               O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen
               To that meek man, who well had sacrificed;
               Is Piety thus and pure Devotion paid?

               
            
            
               Alas, both for the deed and for the cause!
               But have I now seen Death? Is this the way
               I must return to native dust? O sight
               Of terror, foul and ugly to behold,
               Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!

               
            
            
               O miserable Mankind, to what fall
               Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
               Better end hear unborn.  Why is life given
               To be thus wrested from us? rather why
               Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew
               What we receive, would either not accept
               Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down,
               Glad to be so dismissed in peace.  Can thus
               Th'Image of God in man created once
               So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
               To such unsightly sufferings be debas't
               Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man,
               Retaining still Divine similitude
               In part, from such deformities be free,
               And for his Makers Image sake exempt?
                  

               
            
            
               I yield it just, 

 and submit.
               But is there yet no other way, besides
               These painful passages, how we may come
               To Death, and mix with our connatural dust;
               
                  

               
            
            
               Henceforth I fly not Death, nor would prolong
               Life much, bent rather how I may be quit
               
               Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge,
               Which I must keep till my appointed day
               Of rendering up, and patiently attend
               My dissolution. 

               
            
            
               True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blessed,
               Much better seems this Vision, and more hope
               Of peaceful days portends, then those two past;
               Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse,
               Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends.
 O pity and shame, that they who to
live well
               Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread
               Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
               But still I see the tenor of Mans woe
               Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.
            
            
               
                  

               
            
            
               O Visions ill foreseen! better had I
               Lived ignorant of future, so had borne
               My part of evil only, each days lot
               Enough to bear; those now, that were dispensed
               The burden of many Ages, on me light
               At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth
               Abortive, to torment me ere their being,
               With thought that they must be.  Let no man seek
               Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall
               Him or his Children, evil he may be sure,
               Which neither his foreknowing can prevent,
               And he the future evil shall no less
               In apprehension then in substance feel
               Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
               Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped
               Famine and anguish will at last consume
               Wandering that watery Desert: I had hope
               When violence was ceased, and War on Earth,
               All would have then gon well, peace would have crowned
               With length of happy days the race of man;
               But I was far deceived; for now I see
               Peace to corrupt no less then War to waste.
               How comes it thus? unfold, Celestial Guide,
               And whether here the Race of man will end.
                  
               
               
                  

               
            
            
               O thou who future things can represent
               As present, Heavenly instructor, I revive
               At this last sight, assured that Man shall live
               With all the Creatures, and their seed preserve.
               Far less I now lament for one whole World
               Of wicked Sons destroyed, then I rejoice
               For one Man found so perfect and so just,
               That God vouchsafed to raise another World
               From him, and all his anger to forget.
               But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven,
               Distended as the Brow of God appeased,
               Or serve they as a flowery verge to bind
               The fluid skirts of that same watery Cloud,
               Least it again dissolve and shower the Earth?
 O execrable Son so to aspire
               
               Above his Brethren, to himself assuming
               Authority usurped, from God not given:
               He gave us only over Beast, Fish, Fowl
               Dominion absolute; that right we hold
               By his donation; but Man over men
               He made not Lord; such title to himself
               Reserving, human left from human free.
               But this Usurper his encroachment proud
               Stays not on Man; to God his Tower intends
               Siege and defiance: Wretched man! what food
               Will he convey up thither to sustain
               Himself and his rash Army, where thin Air
               Above the Clouds will pine his entrails gross,
               And famish him of Breath, if not of Bread?

O  sent from Heaven,
               Enlightener of my darkness, gracious things
               Thou has reveled, those chiefly which concern
               Just Abraham and his Seed: now first I find
               Mine eyes true opening, and my heart much eased,
               Erwhile perplexed with thoughts what would become
               Of me and all Mankind; but now I see
               His day, in whom all Nations shall be blessed,
               Favour unmerited by me, who sought
               Forbidden knowledge by forbidden means.
               This yet I apprehend not, why to those
               Among whom God will deign to dwell on Earth
               So many and so various Laws are given;
               So many Laws argue so many sins
               Among them; how can God with such reside?

               
            
            
               O Prophet of glad tidings, finisher
               Of utmost hope! now clear I understand
               What oft my steadiest thoughts have searched in vain,
               Why our great expectation should be called
               The seed of Woman: Virgin Mother, Hail,
               High in the love of Heaven, yet from my Loins
               Thou shalt proceed, and from thy Womb the Son
               Of God most High; So God with man unites.
               Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise
               Expect with mortal pain: say where and when
               Their fight, what stroke shall bruise the Victors heel.

               
            
            
               O goodness infinite, goodness immense!
               That all this good of evil shall produce,
               And evil turn to good; more wonderful
               Then that which by creation first brought forth
               Light out of darkness! full of doubt I stand,
               Whether I should repent me now of sin
               By me done and occasioned, or rejoice
               Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring,
               To God more glory, more good will to Men
               From God, and over wrath grace shall abound.
               But say, if our deliverer up to Heaven
               Must re-ascend, what will betide the few
               His faithful, left among th'unfaithful herd,
               The enemies of truth; who then shall guide
               His people, who defend? will they not deal
               Worse with his followers then with him they dealt?
 How soon hath thy prediction, Seer
blessed,
               Measured this transient World, the Race of time,
               Till time stand fixed: beyond is all abyss,
               Eternity, whose end no eye can reach.
               Greatly instructed I shall hence depart,
               Greatly in peace of thought, and have my fill
               Of knowledge, what this Vessel can contain;
               
               Beyond which was my folly to aspire.
               Henceforth I learn, that to obey is best,
               And love with fear the only God, to walk
               As in his presence, ever to observe
               His providence, and on him sole depend,
               Merciful over all his works, with good
               Still overcoming evil, and by small
               Accomplishing great things, by things deemed weak
               Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise
               By simply meek; that suffering for Truths sake
               Is fortitude to highest victory,
               And to the faithful Death the Gate of Life;
               Taught this by his example whom I now
               Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blessed.