
               
            
            
               I should be much for open War, O Peers,
               As not behind in hate; if what was urged
               Main reason to persuade immediate War,
               Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast
               Ominous conjecture on the whole success:
               When he who most excels in fact of Arms,
               In what he counsels and in what excels
               Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
               And utter dissolution, as the scope
               Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
               First, what Revenge? the Towers of Heaven are filled
               With Armed watch, that render all access
               Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep
               Encamp their Legions, or with obscure wing
               Scout far and wide into the Realm of night,
               Scorning surprise.  Or could we break our way 
               
               By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
               With blackest Insurrection, to confound
               Heavens purest Light, yet our great Enemy
               All incorruptible would on his Throne
               Sit unpolluted, and the Ethereal mould
               Incapable of stain would soon expel
               Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire
               Victorious.  Thus repulsed, our final hope
               Is flat despair: we must exasperate
               The Almighty Victor to spend all his rage,
               And that must end us, that must be our cure,
               To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose,
               Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
               Those thoughts that wander through Eternity,
               To perish rather, swallowed up and lost
               In the wide womb of uncreated night,
               Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows,
               Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
               Can give it, or will ever? how he can
               Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.
               Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
               Belike through impotence, or unaware,
               To give his Enemies their wish, and end
               Them in his anger, whom his anger saves
               To punish endless? wherefore cease we then?
               Say they who counsel War, we are decreed,
               Reserved and destined to Eternal woe;
               Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
               What can we suffer worse? is this then worst,
               Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms?
               What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
               With Heavens afflicting Thunder, and besought
               The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seemed
               A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay 
                  
               
               Chained on the burning Lake? that sure was worse.
               What if the breath that kindled those grim fires
               Awaked should blow them into sevenfold rage
               And plunge us in the flames? or from above
               Should intermitted vengeance arm again
               His red right hand to plague us? what if all
               Her stores were opened, and this Firmament
               Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire,
               Impending horrors, threatening hideous fall
               One day upon our heads; while we perhaps
               Designing or exhorting glorious war,
               Caught in a fiery Tempest shall be hurled
               Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
               Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
               Under yon boiling Ocean, wrapped in Chains;
               There to converse with everlasting groans,
               Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd,
               Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse.
               War therefore, open or concealed, alike
               My voice dissuades; for what can force or guile
               With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
               Views all things at one view? he from heavens height
The final h was inked in in some copies of the 1674
edition, apparently at the Simmons' press.
               
               All these our motions vain, sees and derides;
               Not more Almighty to resist our might
               Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
               Shall we then live thus vile, the Race  some 
copies have race of Heaven
               Thus trampled, thus expelled to suffer here
               Chains and these Torments? better these then worse
               By my advice; since fate inevitable
               Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree,
               The Victors will.  To suffer, as to doe,
               Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust
               That so ordains: this was at first resolved,
               If we were wise, against so great a foe 
               
               Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
               I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold
               And venturous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
               What yet they know must follow, to endure
               Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,
               The sentence of their Conqueror: This is now
               Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,
               Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit
               His anger, and perhaps thus far removed
               Not mind us not offending, satisfied
               With what is punished; whence these raging fires
               Will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames.
               Our purer essence then will overcome
               Their noxious vapour, or inured not feel,
               Or changed at length, and to the place conformed
               In temper and in nature, will receive
               Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain;
               This horror will grow mild, this darkness light,
               Besides what hope the never-ending flight
               Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
               Worth waiting, since our present lot appears
               For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
               If we procure not to our selves more woe.
 Leader, the terms we sent were
terms of weight,
               Of hard contents, and full of force urged home,
               Such as we might perceive amused them all,
               And stumbled many, who receives them right,
               Had need from head to foot well understand;
               Not understood, this gift they have besides,
               They show us when our foes walk not upright.