
               
            
            
               Only begotten Son, see thou what rage
               Transports our adversary, whom no bounds
               Prescribed, no bars of Hell, nor all the chains 
               
               Heaped on him there, nor yet the main Abyss
               Wide interrupt can hold; so bent he seems
               On desperate revenge, that shall redound
               Upon his own rebellious head.  And now
               Through all restraint broke loose he wings his way
               Not far off Heaven, in the Precincts of light,
               Directly towards the new created World,
               And Man there placed, with purpose to assay
               If him by force he can destroy, or worse,
               By some false guile pervert; and shall pervert
               For man will harken to his glozing lies,
               And easily transgress the sole Command,
               Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall,
               He and his faithless Progeny: whose fault?
               Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of me
               All he could have; I made him just and right,
               Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
               Such I created all the Ethereal Powers
               And Spirits, both them who stood and them who failed;
               Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
               Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
               Of true allegiance, constant Faith or Love,
               Where only what they needs must do, appeared,
               Not what they would? what praise could they receive?
               What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
               When Will and Reason (Reason also is choice)
               Useless and vain, of freedom both despoiled,
               Made passive both, had served necessity,
               Not me.  They therefore as to right belongs,
               So were created, nor can justly accuse
               Their maker, or their making, or their Fate,
               As if predestination over-ruled
               Their will, disposed by absolute Decree
               Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed 
                  
               
               Their own revolt, not I: if I foreknew,
               Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
               Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
               So without least impulse or shadow of Fate,
               Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
               They trespass, Authors to themselves in all
               Both what they judge and what they choose; for so
               I formed them free, and free they must remain,
               Till they enthral themselves: I else must change
               Their nature, and revoke the high Decree
               Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordained
               Their freedom, they themselves ordained their fall.
               The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
               Self-tempted, self-depraved: Man falls deceived
               By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace,
               The other none: in Mercy and Justice both,
               Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel,
               But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine.
 O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief
delight,
               Son of my bosom, Son who art alone
               My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
               All has thou spok'n as my thoughts are, all
               As my Eternal purpose hath decreed:
               Man shall not quite be lost, but saved who will,
               Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
               Freely vouchsafed; once more I will renew
               His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthralled
               By sin to foul exorbitant desires;
               Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
               On even ground against his mortal foe,
               By me upheld, that he may know how frail
               His fallen condition is, and to me ow
               All his deliverance, and to none but me.
               Some I have chosen of peculiar grace
               Elect above the rest; so is my will: 
               
               The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warned
               Their sinful state, and to appease betimes
               The incensed Deity, while offered grace
               Invites; for I will clear their senses dark,
               What may suffice, and soften stony hearts
               To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
               To Prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
               Though but endeavoured with sincere intent,
               Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
               And I will place within them as a guide
               My Umpire Conscience, whom if they will hear,
               Light after light well used they shall attain,
               And to the end persisting, safe arrive.
               This my long sufferance and my day of grace
               They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;
               But hard be hardened, blind be blinded more,
               That they may stumble on, and deeper fall;
               And none but such from mercy I exclude.
               But yet all is not don; Man disobeying,
               Disloyal breaks his fealty, and sins
               Against the high Supremacy of Heaven,
               Affecting God-head, and so loosing all,
               To expiate his Treason hath nought left,
               But to destruction sacred and devote,
               He with his whole posterity must dye,
               Dye he or Justice must; unless for him
               Some other able, and as willing, pay
               The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
               Say Heavenly powers, where shall we find such love,
               Which of ye will be mortal to redeem
               Mans mortal crime, and just the unjust to save,
               Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?

               
            
            
               O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace
               Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou
               My sole complacence! well thou know how dear,
               To me are all my works, nor Man the least
               Though last created, that for him I spare
               Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
               By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost.
               Thou therefore whom thou only can redeem,
               Their Nature also to thy Nature join;
               And be thy self Man among men on Earth,
               Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed,
               By wondrous birth: Be thou in Adams room
               The Head of all mankind, though Adams Son.
               As in him perish all men, so in thee 
               
               As from a second root shall be restored,
               As many as are restored, without thee none.
               His crime makes guilty all his Sons, thy merit
               Imputed shall absolve them who renounce
               Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
               And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
               Receive new life.  So Man, as is most just,
               Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die,
               And dying rise, and rising with him raise
               His Brethren, ransomed with his own dear life.
               So Heavenly love shall outdo Hellish hate
               Giving to death, and dying to redeem,
               So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate
               So easily destroyed, and still destroys
               In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
               Nor shalt thou by descending to assume
               Mans Nature, lesson or degrade thine own.
               Because thou has, though Throned in highest bliss
               Equal to God, and equally enjoying
               God-like fruition, quited all to save
               A World from utter loss, and has been found
               By Merit more then Birthright Son of God,
               Found worthiest to be so by being Good,
               Far more then Great or High; because in thee
               Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds,
               Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt
               With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne;
               Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt Reign
               Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
               Anointed universal King, all Power
               I give thee, reign for ever, and assume
               Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supreme
               Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce:
               All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide 
                  
               
               In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell;
               When thou attended gloriously from Heaven
               Shalt in the Sky appear, and from thee send
               The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaim
               Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Winds
               The living, and forthwith the cited dead
               Of all past Ages to the general Doom
               Shall hasten, such a peal shall rouse their sleep.
               Then all thy Saints assembled, thou shalt judge
               Bad men and Angels, they arraigned shall sink
               Beneath thy Sentence; Hell, her numbers full,
               Thenceforth shall be for ever shut.  Mean while
               The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring
               New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell,
               And after all their tribulations long
               See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
               With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth.
               Then thou thy regal Sceptre shalt lay by,
               For regal Sceptre then no more shall need,
               God shall be All in All.  But all ye Gods,
               Adore him, who to compass all this dies,
               Adore the Son, and honour him as me.

               
            
            
               
                  Raphael, said he, thou hear what stir on Earth
               
                  Satan from Hell escaped through the darksome Gulf
               Hath raised in Paradise, and how disturbed
               This night the human pair, how he designs
               In them at once to ruin all mankind.
               Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend
               Converse with Adam, in what Bower or shade
               Thou find him from the heat of Noon retired,
               To respite his day-labour with repast,
               Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,
               As may advise him of his happy state, 
               
               Happiness in his power left free to will,
               Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,
               Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware
               He swerve not too secure: tell him withal
               His danger, and from whom, what enemy
               Late fallen himself from Heaven, is plotting now
               The fall of others from like state of bliss;
               By violence, no, for that shall be withstood,
               But by deceit and lies; this let him know,
               Least wilfully transgressing he pretend
               Surprise, unadmonisht, unforewarnd.

               
            
            
               Hear all ye Angels, Progeny of Light,
               Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
               Hear my Decree, which unrevok't shall stand.
               This day I have begot whom I declare
               My only Son, and on this holy Hill
               Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
               At my right hand;  your Head I him appoint;
               And by my Self have sworn to him shall bow 
                  
               
               All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord:
               Under his great Vicegerent Reign abide
               United as one individual Soul
               For ever happy: him who disobeys
               Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day
               Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
               Into utter darkness, deep engulfed, his place
               Ordained without redemption, without end. 

               
            
            
               Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
               In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,
               Nearly it now concerns us to be sure
               Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms
               We mean to hold what anciently we claim
               Of Deity or Empire, such a foe
               Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne
               Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North;
               Nor so content, hath in his thought to try
               In battle, what our Power is, or our right.
               Let us advise, and to this hazard draw
               With speed what force is left, and all employ
               In our defence, lest unawares we lose
               This our high place, our Sanctuary, our Hill.

               
            
            
               Servant of God, well done, well has thou  fought
               The better fight, who single has maintained
               Against revolted multitudes the Cause
               Of Truth, in word mightier then they in Arms;
               And for the testimony of Truth has born    
                  
               
               Universal reproach, far worse to bear
               Then violence: for this was all thy care
               To stand approved in sight of God, though Worlds
               Judged thee perverse: the easier conquest now
               Remains thee, aided by this host of friends,
               Back on thy foes more glorious to return
               Then scorned thou did depart, and to subdue
               By force, who reason for their Law refuse,
               Right reason for their Law, and for their King
               
                  Messiah, who by right of merit Reigns.
               Go Michael of Celestial Armies Prince,
               And thou in Military prowess next
               
                  Gabriel, lead forth to Battle these my Sons
               Invincible, lead forth my armed Saints
               By Thousands and by Millions ranged for fight;
               Equal in number to that Godless crew
               Rebellious, them with Fire and hostile Arms
               Fearless assault, and to the brow of Heaven
               Pursuing drive them out from God and bliss,
               Into their place of punishment, the Gulf
               Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide
               His fiery Chaos to receive their fall.
 Effulgence of my Glory, Son beloved,
               Son in whose face invisible is beheld
               Visibly, what by Deity I am,
               And in whose hand what by Decree I doe,
               Second Omnipotence, two days are past,
               Two days, as we compute the days of Heaven,
               Since Michael and his Powers went forth to tame
               These disobedient; sore hath been their fight,
               As likeliest was, when two such Foes met armed;
               For to themselves I left them, and thou know,
               Equal in their Creation they were formed,
               Save what sin hath impaired, which yet hath wrought
               Insensibly, for I suspend their doom;
               Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last
               Endless, and no solution will be found:
               War wearied hath performed what War can do,
               And to disordered rage let loose the reins,
               With Mountains as with Weapons armed, which makes
               Wild work in Heaven, and dangerous to the maine.
               Two days are therefore past, the third is thine;
               For thee I have ordained it, and thus far
               Have suffered, that the Glory may be thine
               Of ending this great War, since none but Thou
               Can end it.  Into thee such Virtue and Grace
               Immense I have transfused, that all may know
               In Heaven and Hell thy Power above compare,
               And this perverse Commotion governed thus,
               To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir
               Of all things, to be Heir and to be King
               By Sacred Unction, thy deserved right.
               Go then thou Mightiest in thy Fathers might,
               Ascend my Chariot, guide the rapid Wheels
               That shake Heavens basis, bring forth all my War,
               My Bow and Thunder, my Almighty Arms
                  
               
               Gird on, and Sword upon thy puissant Thigh;
               Pursue these sons of Darkness, drive them out
               From all Heavens bounds into the utter Deep:
               There let them learn, as likes them, to despise
               God and Messiah his anointed King.

               
            
            
               At least our envious Foe hath failed, who  thought
               All like himself rebellious, by whose aid
               This inaccessible high strength, the seat
               Of Deity supreme, us dispossessed,
               He trusted to have seized, and into fraud
               Drew many, whom their place knows here no more;
               
               Yet far the greater part have kept, I see,
               Their station, Heaven yet populous retains
               Number sufficient to possess her Realms
               Though wide, and this high Temple to frequent
               With Ministries due and solemn Rites:
               But least his heart exalt him in the harm
               Already done, to have dispeopl'd Heaven
               My damage fondly deemed, I can repair
               That detriment, if such it be to lose
               Self-lost, and in a moment will create
               Another World, out of one man a Race
               Of men innumerable, there to dwell,
               Not here, till by degrees of merit raised
               They open to themselves at length the way
               Up hither, under long obedience tried,
               And Earth be changed to Heaven, &amp; Heaven to Earth,
               One Kingdom, Joy and Union without end.
               Mean while inhabit lax, ye Powers of Heaven,
               And thou my Word, begotten Son, by thee
               This I perform, speak thou, and be it don:
               My overshadowing Spirit and might with thee
               I send along, ride forth, and bid the Deep
               Within appointed bounds be Heaven and Earth,
               Boundless the Deep, because I am who fill
               Infinitude, nor vacuous the space.
               Though I uncircumscribed my self retire,
               And put not forth my goodness, which is free
               To act or not, Necessity and Chance
               Approach not me, and what I will is Fate.
 Let us make now Man in our image, Man
               In our similitude, and let them rule
               Over the Fish and Foul of Sea and Air,
               Beast of the Field, and over all the Earth,
               And every creeping thing that creeps the ground.
 thy Mansion wants thee,
Adam, rise,
               First Man, of Men innumerable ordained
               First Father, called by thee I come thy Guide
               To the Garden of bliss, thy seat prepared.
               
                  
 Whom thou
soughtst I am,
               
                  

 Author of all this thou see
               Above, or round about thee or beneath.
               This Paradise I give thee, count it thine
               To Till and keep, and of the Fruit to eat:
               Of every Tree that in the Garden grows
               Eat freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth:
               But of the Tree whose operation brings
               Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set
               The Pledge of thy Obedience and thy Faith
               Amid the Garden by the Tree of Life
               Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste,
               And shun the bitter consequence: for know,
               The day thou eats thereof, my sole command
               Transgressed, inevitably thou shalt dye;
               From that day mortal, and this happy State
               Shalt loose, expelled from hence into a World
               Of woe and sorrow.  
 Not only these fair bounds, but all
the Earth
               To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords
               Possess it, and all things that therein live,
               Or live in Sea, or Air, Beast, Fish, and Foul.
               In sign whereof each Bird and Beast behold
               After their kinds; I bring them to receive
               From thee their Names, and pay thee fealty
               With low subjection; understand the same
               Of Fish within their watery residence,
               Not hither summoned, since they cannot change
               Their Element to draw the thinner Air.
               
               
                  
 What call thou solitude, is not
the Earth
               With various living creatures, and the Air
               Replenished, and all these at thy command
               To come and play before thee, know thou not
               Their language and their ways, they also know,
               And reason not contemptibly; with these
               Find pastime, and bear rule; thy Realm is large.
               
                  
 A nice and subtle happiness I see
               Thou to thy self propose, in the choice
               Of thy Associates, Adam, and wilt taste
               No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
               What think thou then of me, and this my State,
               Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
               Of happiness, or not? who am alone
               From all Eternity, for none I know
               Second to me or like, equal much less.
               How have I then with whom to hold converse
               Save with the Creatures which I made, and those
               To me inferior, infinite descents
               Beneath what other Creatures are to thee?
               
                  

               
            
            
               Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased,
               And find thee knowing not of Beasts alone,
               Which thou has rightly named, but of thy self,
               Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
               My Image, not imparted to the Brute,
               Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
               Good reason was thou freely should dislike,
               And be so minded still; I, ere thou spoke,
               Knew it not good for Man to be alone,
               And no such company as then thou saw
               Intended thee, for trial only brought,
               To see how thou could judge of fit and meet:
               What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
               Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
               
               Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.
 Ye shall
not eat
               Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, least ye die.

               
            
            
               Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
               From unsuccessful charge, be not dismayed,
               Nor troubled at these tidings from the Earth,
               Which your sincerest care could not prevent,
               Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
               When first this Tempter crossed the Gulf from Hell.
               I told ye then he should prevail and speed
               On his bad Errand, Man should be seduced
               And flattered out of all, believing lies
               Against his Maker; no Decree of mine
               Concurring to necessitate his Fall,
               Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
               His free Will, to her own inclining left
               In even scale.  But fallen he is, and now
               
               What rests but that the mortal Sentence pass
               On his transgression, Death denounced that day,
               Which he presumes already vain and void,
               Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
               By some immediate stroke; but soon shall find
               Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.
               Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
               But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee
               Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferred
               All Judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
               Easy it might be seen that I intend
               Mercy colleague with Justice, sending thee
               Mans Friend, his Mediator, his designed
               Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
               And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.

               
            
            
               See with what heat these Dogs of Hell  advance
               To waste and havoc yonder World, which I
               So fair and good created, and had still
               Kept in that State, had not the folly of Man
               Let in these wistful Furies, who impute
               Folly to me, so doth the Prince of Hell
               And his Adherents, that with so much ease
               I suffer them to enter and possess
               A place so heavenly, and conniving-seem
               To gratify my scornful Enemies,
               
               That laugh, as if transported with some fit
               Of Passion, I to them had quited all,
               At random yielded up to their misrule;
               And know not that I called and drew them thither
               My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth
               Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath shed
               On what was pure, till crammed and gorged, nigh burst
               With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling
               Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son,
               Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave
at  last
               Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Hell
               For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jaws.
               Then Heaven and Earth renewed shall be made pure
               To sanctity that shall receive no stain:
               Till then the Curse pronounced on both precedes.

                  Increase and  multiply,
               
                  

               
               All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
               Obtain, all thy request was my Decree:
               But longer in that Paradise to dwell,
               The Law I gave to Nature him forbids:
               Those pure immortal Elements that know
               No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foul,
               Eject him tainted now, and purge him off
               As a distemper, gross to air as gross,
               And mortal food, as may dispose him best
               For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first
               Distempered all things, and of incorrupt
               Corrupted.  I at first with two fair gifts
               Created him endowed, with Happiness
               And Immortality: that fondly lost,
               This other served but to eternize woe;
               Till I provided Death; so Death becomes
               His final remedy, and after Life
               Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined
               By Faith and faithful works, to second Life,
               Waked in the renovation of the just,
               Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed.
               But let us call to Synod all the Blessed
               Through Heavens wide bounds; from them I will not hide
               My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed,
               As how with peccant Angels late they saw;
               And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed.