
               
            
            
               Either to disinthrone the King of Heaven
               We war, if war be best, or to regain
               Our own right lost : him to unthrone we then
               May hope when everlasting Faith shall yield
               To fickle Chance and Chaos judge the strife:
               The former vain to hope argues as vain
               The latter: for what place can be for us
               Within Heavens bound, unless Heavens Lord supreme 
                  
               
               We overpower? Suppose he should relent
               And publish Grace to all, on promise made
               Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we
               Stand in his presence humble, and receive
               Strict Laws imposed, to celebrate his Throne
               With warbled Hymns, and to his Godhead sing
               Forced Halleluiahs; while he Lordly sits
               Our envied Soverign, and his Altar breathes
               Ambrosial Odours and Ambrosial Flowers,
               Our servile offerings.  This must be our task
               In Heaven this our delight; how wearisome
               Eternity so spent in worship paid
               To whom we hate.  Let us not then pursue
               By force impossible, by leave obtained
               Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state
               Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek
               Our own good from our selves, and from our own
               Live to our selves, though in this vast recess,
               Free, and to none accountable, preferring
               Hard liberty before the easy yoke
               Of servile Pomp.  Our greatness will appear
               Then most conspicuous, when great things of small,
               Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse
               We can create, and in what place so ever
               Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
               Through labour and endurance.  This deep world
               Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst
               Thick clouds and dark doth Heavens all-ruling Sire
               Choose to reside, his Glory unobscured,
               And with the Majesty of darkness round
               Covers his Throne;  from whence deep thunders roar
               Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell?
               As he our darkness, cannot we his Light
               Imitate when we please? This Desert soil 
               
               Wants not her hidden lustre, Gems and Gold;
               Nor want we skill or Artsome copies have  art,
from whence to raise
               Magnificence; and what can Heaven show more?
               Our torments also may in length of time
               Become our Elements, these piercing Fires
               As soft as now severe, our temper changed
               Into their temper; which must needs remove
               The sensible of pain.  All things invite
               To peaceful Counsels, and the settled State
               Of order, how in safety best we may
               Compose our present evils, with regard
               Of what we are and were, dismissing quite
               All thoughts of war: ye have what I advise.