
               
            
            
               If thou be he; But O how fallen! how changed
               From him, who in the happy Realms of Light
               Clothed with transcendent brightness did out-shine
               Myriads though bright: If he whom mutual league,
               United thoughts and counsels, equal hope
               And hazard in the Glorious Enterprise,
               Joined with me once, now misery hath joined
               In equal ruin: into what Pit thou see
               From what height fallen, so much the stronger proved
               He with his Thunder: and till then who knew
               The force of those dire Arms?  yet not for those,
               Nor what the Potent Victor in his rage
               Can else inflict, do I repent or change,
               Though changed in outward lustre; that fixed mind
               And high disdain, from sense of injured merit,
               That with the mightiest raised me to contend,
               And to the fierce contention brought along
               Innumerable force of Spirits armed
               That dared dislike his reign, and me preferring,
               His utmost power with adverse power opposed
               In dubious Battle on the Plains of Heaven,
               And shook his throne.  What though the field be lost?
               All is not lost; the unconquerable Will,
               And study of revenge, immortal hate,
               And courage never to submit or yield:
               And what is else not to be overcome?
               That Glory never shall his wrath or might
               Extort from me.  To bow and sue for grace
               With suppliant knee, and deify his power,
               Who from the terror of this Arm so late
               Doubted his Empire, that were low indeed,
               That were an ignominy and shame beneath
               
               This downfall; since by Fate the strength of Gods
               And this Imperial substance cannot fail,
               Since through experience of this great event
               In Arms not worse, in foresight much advanced,
               We may with more successful hope resolve
               To wage by force or guile eternal War
               Irreconcilable, to our grand Foe,
               Who now triumphs, and in the excess of joy
               Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heaven.
               
                  

               
            
            
               Fallen Cherub, to be weak is miserable
               Doing or Suffering: but of this be sure,
               To do ought good never will be our task,
               But ever to do ill our sole delight,
               As being the contrary to his high will
               Whom we resist.  If then his Providence
               Out of our evil seek to bring forth good,
               Our labour must be to pervert that end,
               And out of good still to find means of evil;
               Which oft times may succeed, so as perhaps 
               Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb
               His inmost counsels from their destined aim.
               But see the angry Victor hath recalled
               His Ministers of vengeance and pursuit
               Back to the Gates of Heaven: the Sulphurous Hail
               Shot after us in storm, overblown hath laid
               The fiery Surge, that from the Precipice
               Of Heaven received us falling, and the Thunder,
               Winged with red Lightning and impetuous rage,
               Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now
               To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep.
               Let us not slip the occasion, whether scorn,
               Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe.
               See thou yon dreary Plain, forlorn and wilde,
               The seat of desolation, void of light,
               Save what the glimmering of these livid flames
               Casts pale and dreadful?  Thither let us tend
               
               From off the tossing of these fiery waves,
               There rest, if any rest can harbour there,
               And reassembling our afflicted Powers,
               Consult how we may henceforth most offend
               Our Enemy, our own loss how repair,
               How overcome this dire Calamity,
               What reinforcement we may gain from Hope,
               If not what resolution from despair.
               
                  

               
            
            
               Is this the Region, this the Soil, the Clime,
               Said then the lost Arch-Angel, this the seat
               That we must change for Heaven, this mournful gloom
               For that celestial light?  Be it so, since he
               Who now is Sovran can dispose and bid
               What shall be right: fardest from him is best
               Whom reason hath equalled, force hath made supreme
               Above his equals.  Farewell happy Fields
               Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrors, hail
               Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell
               
               Receive thy new Possessor: One who brings
               A mind not to be changed by Place or Time.
               The mind is its own place, and in it self
               Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.
               What matter where, if I be still the same,
               And what I should be, all but less then he
               Whom Thunder hath made greater? Here at least
               We shall be free; the Almighty hath not built
               Here for his envy, will not drive us hence:
               Here we may reign secure, and in my choice
               To reign is worth ambition though in Hell:
               Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heaven.
               But wherefore let we then our faithful friends,
               The associates and copartners of our loss
               Lye thus astonished on the oblivious Pool,
               And call them not to share with us their part
               In this unhappy Mansion, or once more
               With rallied Arms to try what may be yet
               Regained in Heaven, or what more lost in Hell?
               
                  
 Princes,
Potentates,
               Warriors, the Flower of Heaven, once yours, now lost,
               If such astonishment as this can seize
               Eternal spirits; or have ye chosen this place
               After the toil of Battle to repose
               
               Your wearied virtue, for the ease you find
               To slumber here, as in the Vales of Heaven?
               Or in this abject posture have ye sworn
               To adore the Conqueror?  who now beholds
               Cherub and Seraph rolling in the Flood
               With scattered Arms and Ensigns, till anon
               His swift pursuers from Heaven Gates discern
               The advantage, and descending tread us down
               Thus drooping, or with linked Thunderbolts
               Transfix us to the bottom of this Gulf.
               Awake, arise, or be for ever fallen.
               
                  

               
            
            
               O Myriads of immortal Spirits, O Powers
               Matchless, but with the Almighty, and that strife
               Was not inglorious, though the event was dire,
               As this place testifies, and this dire change
                  
               
               Hateful to utter: but what power of mind
               Foreseeing or presaging, from the Depth
               Of knowledge past or present, could have feared,
               How such united force of Gods, how such
               As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
               For who can yet believe, though after loss,
               That all these puissant Legions, whose exile
               Hath emptied Heaven, shall fail to re-ascend
               Self-raised, and repossess their native seat?
               For me be witness all the Host of Heaven,
               If counsels different, or danger shunned
               By me  some copies have me ,  have lost our
hopes.  But he who reigns
               Monarch in Heaven, till then as one secure
               Sat on his Throne, upheld by old repute,
               Consent or custom, and his Regal State
               Put forth at full, but still his strength concealed,
               Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
               Henceforth his might we know, and know our own
               So as not either to provoke, or dread
               New war, provoked; our better part remains
               To work in close design, by fraud or guile
               What force effected not: that he no less
               At length from us may find, who overcomes
               By force, hath overcome but half his foe.
               Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife
               There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long
               Intended to create, and therein plant
               A generation, whom his choice regard
               Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven:
               Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps
               Our first eruption, thither or elsewhere:
               For this Infernal Pit shall never hold
               C??lestial Spirits in Bondage, nor the Abyss
               Long under darkness cover.  But these thoughts
               
               Full Counsel must mature: Peace is despaired,
               For who can think Submission? War then, War
               Open or understood must be resolved.
               
                  

               
            
            
               Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven,
               For since no deep within her gulf can hold
               Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen,
               I give not Heaven for lost.  From this descent
               Celestial virtues rising, will appear
               More glorious and more dread then from no fall,
               And trust themselves to fear no second fate:
               Me though just right, and the fixed Laws of Heaven
               Did first create your Leader, next free choice,
               With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight,
               Hath bin achieved of merit, yet this loss
               Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
               Established in a safe unenvied Throne
               Yielded with full consent.  The happier state
               In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
               Envy from each inferior; but who here
               Will envy whom the highest place exposes
               Foremost to stand against the Thunderers aim
               Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
               Of endless pain? where there is then no good
               For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
               From Faction; for none sure will claim in Hell 
               
               Precedence, none, whose portion is so small
               Of present pain, that with ambitious mind
               Will covet more.  With this advantage then
               To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord,
               More then can be in Heaven, we now return
               To claim our just inheritance of old,
               Surer to prosper then prosperity
               Could have assured us; and by what best way,
               Whether of open War or covert guile,
               We now debate; who can advise, may speak.

               
            
            
               O Progeny of Heaven, Imperial Thrones,
               With reason hath deep silence and demure
               Seized us, though undismayed: long is the way
               And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light;
               Our prison strong, this huge convex of Fire,
               Outrageous to devour, immures us round
               Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant
               Barred over us prohibit all egress.
               These past, if any pass, the void profound
               Of inessential Night receives him next
               Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being 
               
               Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf.
               If thence he escape into whatever world,
               Or unknown Region, what remains him less
               Then unknown dangers and as hard escape.
               But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers,
               And this Imperial Sovereignty, adorned
               With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
               And judged of public moment, in the shape
               Of difficulty or danger could deter
               Me  some copies have me  from  attempting. 
Wherefore do I assume
               These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign,
               Refusing to accept as great a share
               Of hazard as of honour, due alike
               To him who Reigns, and so much to him due
               Of hazard more, as he above the rest
               High honoured sits? Go therefore mighty Powers,
               Terror of Heaven, though fallen; intend at home,
               While here shall be our home, what best may ease
               The present misery, and render Hell
               More tolerable; if there be cure or charm
               To respite or deceive, or slack the pain
               Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch
               Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad
               Through all the Coasts of dark destruction seek
               Deliverance for us all: this enterprise
               None shall partake with me.  

               
            
            
               Whence and what art thou, execrable shape,
               That dare, though grim and terrible, advance
               Thy miscreated Front athwart my way
               To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass,
               That be assured, without leave asked of thee:
               Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
               Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven.

               
            
            
               So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
               Thou interposes, that my sudden hand
               Prevented spares to tell thee yet by deeds
               What it intends; till first I know of thee,
               What thing thou art, thus double-formed, and why
               In this infernal Veil first met thou call
               Me Father, and that Phantasm call my Son?
               I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
               Sight more detestable then him and thee. 
                  

               
               Dear Daughter, since thou clammiest me for thy Sire,
               And my fair Son here shows me, the dear pledge
               Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys
               Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
               Befallen us unforeseen, unthought of, know
               I come no enemy, but to set free
               From out this dark and dismal house of pain,
               Both him and thee, and all the heavenly Host
               Of Spirits that in our just pretences armed
               Fell with us from on high: from them I go
               This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
               My self expose, with lonely steps to tread
               The unfounded deep, and through the void immense
               To search with wandering quest a place foretold
               Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now
               Created vast and round, a place of bliss
               In the Purlieus of Heaven, and therein placed
               A race of upstart Creatures, to supply
               Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed,
               Least Heaven surcharged with potent multitude
               Might hap to move new broils: Be this or aught
               Then this more secret now designed, I haste
               To know, and this once known, shall soon return,
               And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death
               Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
               Wing silently the buxom Air, embalmed
               With odours; there ye shall be fed and filled
               Immeasurably, all things shall be your prey.

 Ye Powers
               And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss,
               
                  Chaos and ancient Night, I come no Spy,
               With purpose to explore or to disturb
               The secrets of your Realm, but by constraint
               Wandering this darksome Desert, as my way,
               Lies through your spacious Empire up to light,
               Alone, and without guide, half lost, I seek
               What readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds
               Confine with Heaven; or if some other place
               From your Dominion won, the Ethereal King
               Possesses lately, thither to arrive
               I travel this profound, direct my course;
               Directed no mean recompense it brings
               To your behoof, if I that Region lost, 
               
               All usurpation thence expelled, reduce
               To her original darkness and your sway
               (Which is my present journey) and once more
               Erect the Standard there of ancient Night;
               Yours be the advantage all, mine the revenge.

               
            
            
               
                  Uriel, for thou of those seven Spirits that stand
               In sight of God's high Throne, gloriously bright,
               The first art wont his great authentic will
               Interpreter through highest Heaven to bring,
               Where all his Sons thy Embassy attend;
               And here art likeliest by supreme decree
               Like honour to obtain, and as his Eye
               To visit oft this new Creation round; 
                  
               
               Unspeakable desire to see, and know
               All these his wondrous works, but chiefly Man,
               His chief delight and favour, him for whom
               All these his works so wondrous he ordained,
               Hath brought me from the Quires of Cherubim
               Alone thus wandering.  Brightest Seraph tell
               In which of all these shining Orbs hath Man
               His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none,
               But all these shining Orbs his choice to dwell;
               That I may find him, and with secret gaze,
               Or open admiration him behold
               On whom the great Creator hath bestowed
               Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces poured;
               That both in him and all things, as is meet,
               The Universal Maker we may praise;
               Who justly hath driven out his Rebel Foes
               To deepest Hell, and to repair that loss
               Created this new happy Race of Men
               To serve him better: wise are all his ways.

               
            
            
               O thou that with surpassing Glory crowned,
               Look from thy sole Dominion like the God
               Of this new World; at whose sight all the Stars
               Hide their diminished heads; to thee I call,
               But with no friendly voice, and add thy name
               O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams
               That bring to my remembrance from what state
               I fell, how glorious once above thy Sphere;
               Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down
               Warring in Heaven against Heavens matchless King:
               Ah wherefore! he deserved no such return
               From me, whom he created what I was
               In that bright eminence, and with his good
               Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.
               What could be less then to afford him praise,
               The easiest recompense, and pay him thanks,
               How due! yet all his good proved ill in me,
               And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
               I stained subjection, and thought one step higher
               Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
               The debt immense of endless gratitude, 
                  
               
               So burdensome still paying, still to ow;
               Forgetful what from him I still received,
               And understood not that a grateful mind
               By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
               Indebted and discharged; what burden then?
               O had his powerful Destiny ordained
               Me some inferior Angel, I had stood
               Then happy; no unbounded hope had raised
               Ambition.  Yet why not? some other Power
               As great might have aspired, and me though mean
               Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great
               Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within
               Or from without, to all temptations armed.
               Had thou the same free Will and Power to stand?
               Thou had: whom has thou then or what to accuse,
               But Heavens free Love dealt equally to all?
               Be then his Love accursed, since love or hate,
               To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
               Nay cursed be thou; since against his thy will
               Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
               Me miserable! which way shall I fly
               Infinite wrath, and infinite despair?
               Which way I fly is Hell; my self am Hell;
               And in the lowest deep a lower deep
               Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
               To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.
               O then at last relent: is there no place
               Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left?
               None left but by submission; and that word
               
                  Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
               Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduced
               With other promises and other vaunts
               Then to submit, boasting I could subdue
               The Omnipotent.  Ay me, they little know 
               
               How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
               Under what torments inwardly I groan;
               While they adore me on the Throne of Hell,
               With Diadem and Sceptre high advanced
               The lower still I fall, only Supreme
               In misery; such joy Ambition finds.
               But say I could repent and could obtain
               By Act of Grace my former state; how soon
               Would height recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
               What feigned submission swore: ease would recant
               Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
               For never can true reconciling grow
               Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
               Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
               And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear
               Short intermission bought with double smart.
               This knows my punisher; therefore as far
               From granting he, as I from begging peace:.
               All hope excluded thus, behold in stead
               Of us out-cast, exiled, his new delight,
               Mankind created, and for him this World.
               So farewell Hope, and with Hope farewell Fear,
               Farewell Remorse: all Good to me is lost;
               Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least
               Divided Empire with Heavens King I hold
               By thee, and more then half perhaps will reign;
               As Man ere long, and this new World shall know.

               
            
            
               O Hell! what doe mine eyes with grief behold,
               
               Into our room of bliss thus high advanced
               Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps,
               Not Spirits, yet to heavenly Spirits bright
               Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue
               With wonder, and could love, so lively shines
               In them Divine resemblance, and such grace
               The hand that formed them on their shape hath poured.
               Ah gentle pair, ye little think how nigh
               Your change approaches, when all these delights
               Will vanish and deliver ye to woe,
               More woe, the more your taste is now of joy;
               Happy, but for so happy ill secured
               Long to continue, and this high seat your Heaven
               Ill fenced for Heaven to keep out such a foe
               As now is entered; yet no purposed foe
               To you whom I could pity thus forlorn
               Though I unpitied: League with you I seek,
               And mutual amity so straight, so close,
               That I with you must dwell, or you with me
               Henceforth; my dwelling happily may not please
               Like this fair Paradise, your sense, yet such
               Accept your Makers work; he gave it me,
               Which I as freely give; Hell shall unfold,
               To entertain you two, her widest Gates,
               And send forth all her Kings; there will be room,
               Not like these narrow limits, to receive
               Your numerous offspring; if no better place,
               Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge
               On you who wrong me not for him who wronged.
               And should I at your harmless innocence
               Melt, as I doe, yet public reason just,
               Honour and Empire with revenge enlarged,
               By conquering this new World, compels me now
               To do what else though damned I should abhor. 
                  
                  

               
            
            
               Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two
               Imparadised in one another arms
               The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill
               Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust,
               Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
               Among our other torments not the least,
               Still unfulfilled with pain of longing pines;
               Yet let me not forget what I have gained
               From their own mouths; all is not theirs it seems:
               One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge called,
               Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidden?
               Suspicious, reasonless.  Why should their Lord
               Envy them that? can it be sin to know,
               Can it be death? and do they only stand
               By Ignorance, is that their happy state,
               The proof of their obedience and their faith?
               O fair foundation laid whereon to build
               Their ruin! Hence I will excite their minds
               With more desire to know, and to reject
               Envious commands, invented with design
               To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt
               Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such,
               They taste and die: what likelier can ensue?
               But first with narrow search I must walk round 
                  
               
               This Garden, and no corner leave unspi'd;
               A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
               Some wandering Spirit of Heaven, by Fountain side,
               Or in thick shade retired, from him to draw
               What further would be learnt.  Live while ye may,
               Yet happy pair; enjoy, till I return,
               Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed.

               
            
            
               Know ye not 

               
               Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
               For you, there sitting where ye dared not soar;
               Not to know me argues your selves unknown,
               The lowest of your throng; or if ye know,
               Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
               Your message, like to end as much in vain?
 If I must contend,

               
               Best with the best, the Sender not the sent,
               Or all at once; more glory will be won,
               Or less be lost. 

               
               
                  Gabriel, thou had in Heaven the esteem of wise,
               And such I held thee; but this question asked
               Puts me in doubt.  Lives there who loves his pain?
               Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
               Though thither doomed? Thou would thy self, no doubt,
               And boldly venture to whatever place
               Farthest from pain, where thou might hope to change
               Torment with ease, and soonest recompense
               Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;
               To thee no reason; who know only good,
               But evil has not tried: and wilt object
               His will who bound us? let him surer barr
               His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay
               In that dark durance: thus much what was asked.
               The rest is true, they found me where they say;
               But that implies not violence or harm.

               
               Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
               Insulting Angel, well thou know I stood
               Thy fiercest, when in Battle to thy aide
               Thy blasting volleyed Thunder made all speed
               And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear.
               But still thy words at random, as before,
               Argue thy inexperience what behoves
               From hard assays and ill successes past
               A faithful Leader, not to hazard all
               Through ways of danger by himself untried.
               I therefore, I alone first undertook 
                  
               
               To wing the desolate Abyss, and spy
               This new created World, whereof in Hell
               Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
               Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
               To settle here on Earth, or in mid Air;
               Though for possession put to try once more
               What thou and thy gay Legions dare against;
               Whose easier business were to serve their Lord
               High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his Throne,
               And practised distances to cringe, not fight.

               
            
            
               Then when I am thy captive talk of chains,
               Proud limitarie Cherub, but ere then
               Far heavier load thy self expect to feel
               From my prevailing arm, though Heavens King
               Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers,
               Used to the yoke, draw his triumphant wheels
               In progress through the rode of Heaven Star-paved.
O fair Plant, said he, with
fruit surcharged,
               Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,
               Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despised?
               Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste?
               Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
               Longer thy offered good, why else set here?
               This said he paused not, but with venturous Arm 
                  
               
               He plucked, he tasted; me damp horror chilled
               At such bold words vouched with a deed so bold:
               But he thus overjoyed, 
 O Fruit
Divine,
               Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropped,
               Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit
               For God's, yet able to make Gods of Men:
               And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more
               Communicated, more abundant grows,
               The Author not impaired, but honoured more?
               Here, happy Creature, fair Angelic Eve,
               Partake thou also; happy though thou art,
               Happier thou may be, worthier can not be:
               Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
               Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confined,
               But sometimes in the Air, as wee, sometimes
               Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
               What life the Gods live there, and such live thou.
               So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
               Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
               Which he had plucked; the pleasant savoury smell
               So quickened appetite, that I, methought,
               Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the Clouds
               With him I flew, and underneath beheld
               The Earth outstretched immense, a prospect wide
               And various: wondering at my flight and change
               To this high exaltation; suddenly
               My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down,
               And fell asleep; but O how glad I waked
               To find this but a dream! 

               
            
            
               sleeps thou Companion dear, what sleep can close
               Thy eye-lids: and remember what Decree 
               
               Of yesterday, so late hath past the lips
               Of Heavens Almighty. Thou to me thy thoughts
               Was wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;
               Both waking we were one; how then can now
               Thy sleep dissent? new Laws thou see imposed;
               New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
               In us who serve, new Counsels, to debate
               What doubtful may ensue, more in this place
               To utter is not safe. Assemble thou
               Of all those Myriads which we lead the chief;
               Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night
               Her shadowy Cloud withdraws, I am to haste,
               And all who under me their Banners wave,
               Homeward with flying march where we possess
               The Quarters of the North, there to prepare
               Fit entertainment to receive our King
               The great Messiah, and his new commands,
               Who speedily through all the Hierarchies
               Intends to pass triumphant, and give Laws.

               
            
            
               Thrones, Dominations, Princedomes, Virtues,  Powers,
               If these magnificant Titles yet remain 
               
               Not merely titular, since by Decree
               Another now hath to himself engrossed
               All Power, and us eclipsed under the name
               Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
               Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here,
               This only to consult how we may best
               With what may be devised of honours new
               Receive him coming to receive from us
               Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile,
               Too much to one, but double how endured,
               To one and to his image now proclaimed?
               But what if better counsels might erect
               Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke?
               Will ye submit your necks, and choose to bend
               The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust
               To know ye right, or if ye know your selves
               Natives and Sons of Heaven possessed before
               By none, and if not equal all, yet free,
               Equally free; for Orders and Degrees
               Jar not with liberty, but well consist.
               Who can in reason then or right assume
               Monarchy over such as live by right
               His equals, if in power and splendour less,
               In freedom equal? or can introduce
               Law and Edict on us, who without law
               Err not, much less for this to be our Lord,
               And look for adoration to the abuse
               Of those Imperial Titles which assert
               Our being ordained to govern, not to serve?
 That we were formed then say thou?
and the work
               Of secondary hands, by task transferred
               From Father to his Son? strange point and new!
               Doctrine which we would know whence learnt: who saw
               When this creation was? remember thou
               Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?
               We know no time when we were not as now;
               Know none before us, self-begot, self-raised
               By our own quickening power, when fatal course
               Had circled his full Orb, the birth mature
               Of this our native Heaven, Ethereal Sons.
               Our puissance is our own, our own right hand
               Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try
               Who is our equal: then thou shalt behold
               Whether by supplication we intend
               Address, and to begirt the almighty Throne
               Beseeching or besieging. This report,
               These tidings carry to the anointed King;
               And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight. 
                  
 Ill for thee, but in
wished hour
               Of my revenge, first sought for thou return
               From flight, seditious Angel, to receive
               Thy merited reward, the first assay
               Of this right hand provoked, since first that tongue
               Inspired with contradiction dared oppose
               A third part of the Gods, in Synod met
               Their Deities to assert, who while they feel
               Vigour Divine within them, can allow
               Omnipotence to none.  But well thou come
               Before thy fellows, ambitious to win
               From me some Plume, that thy success may show
               Destruction to the rest: this pause between
               (Unanswered least thou boast) to let thee know;
               At first I thought that Liberty and Heaven
               To heavenly Souls had bin all one; but now
               I see that most through sloth had rather serve,
               Ministering Spirits, trained up in Feast and Song;
               Such has thou armed, the Minstrelsy of Heaven,
               Servility with freedom to contend,
                  
               
               As both their deeds compared this day shall prove.
 Nor think thou with
wind
               Of airy threats to awe whom yet with deeds
               Thou can not.  has thou turned the least of these
               To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise
               Unvanquished, easier to transact with me
               That thou should hope, imperious, and with threats
               To chase me hence? err not that so shall end
               The strife which thou call evil, but wee style
               The strife of Glory: which we mean to win,
               Or turn this Heaven it self into the Hell
               Thou fablest, here however to dwell free,
               If not to reign: mean while thy utmost force,
               And join him named Almighty to thy aid,
               I fly not, but have sought thee far and nigh.

               
            
            
               O now in danger tried, now known in Arms
               Not to be overpowered, Companions dear,
               Found worthy not of Liberty alone,
               Too mean pretence, but what we more affect,
               Honour, Dominion, Glory, and renown,
               Who have sustained one day in doubtful fight
               (And if one day, why not Eternal days?)
               What Heavens Lord had powerfullest to send
               Against us from about his Throne, and judged
               Sufficient to subdue us to his will,
               But proves not so: then fallible, it seems,
               Of future we may deem him, though till now
               Omniscient thought.  True is, less firmly armed,
               Some disadvantage we endured and pain,
               Till now not known, but known as soon contemnd,
               Since now we find this our Imperial form
               Incapable of mortal injury
               Imperishable, and though pierced with wound,
               Soon closing, and by native vigour healed.
               Of evil then so small as easy think
               The remedy; perhaps more valid Arms,
               Weapons more violent, when next we meet,
               May serve to better us, and worse our foes,
               Or equal what between us made the odds,
               
               In Nature none: if other hidden cause
               Left them Superior, while we can preserve
               Unhurt our minds, and understanding sound,
               Due search and consultation will disclose.

 Not uninvented that, which thou aright
               Believst so main to our success, I bring;
               Which of us who beholds the bright surface
               Of this Ethereous mould whereon we stand,
               This continent of spacious Heaven, adorned
               With Plant, Fruit, Flour Ambrosial, Gems &amp; Gold,
               
               Whose Eye so superficially surveys
               These things, as not to mind from whence they grow
               Deep under ground, materials dark and crude,
               Of spirituous and fiery spume, till touched
               With Heavens ray, and tempered they shoot forth
               So beauteous, opening to the ambient light.
               These in their dark Nativity the Deep
               Shall yield us pregnant with infernal flame,
               Which into hallow Engines long and round
               Thick-rammd, at the other bore with touch of fire
               Dilated and infuriate shall send forth
               From far with thundering noise among our foes
               Such implements of mischief as shall dash
               To pieces, and overwhelm whatever stands
               Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmed
               The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt.
               Nor long shall be our labour, yet ere dawn,
               Effect shall end our wish.  Mean while revive;
               Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joint
               Think nothing hard, much less to be despaired.
               
                  

               
            
            
               Vanguard, to Right and Left the Front unfold;
               That all may see who hate us, how we seek
               Peace and composure, and with open breast
               Stand ready to receive them, if they like
               Our overture, and turn not back perverse;
               But that I doubt, however witness Heaven,
               Heaven witness thou anon, while we discharge
               Freely our part; ye who appointed stand
               Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch
               What we propound, and loud that all may hear.

               
            
            
               O Friends, why come not on these Victors proud?
               Ere while they fierce were coming, and when wee,
               To entertain them fair with open Front
               
               And Breast, (what could we more?) propounded terms
               Of composition, strait they changed their minds,
               Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell,
               As they would dance, yet for a dance they seemed
               Somewhat extravagant and wilde, perhaps
               For joy of offered peace: but I suppose
               If our proposals once again were heard
               We should compel them to a quick result.

               
            
            
               O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred
               More justly, Seat worthier of Gods, as built
               With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
               For what God after better worse would build?
               Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens
               That shine, yet bear their bright officious Lamps,
               Light above Light, for thee alone, as seems,
               In thee concentring all their precious beams
               Of sacred influence: As God in Heaven
               Is Center, yet extends to all, so thou
               Centring receive from all those Orbs; in thee,
               Not in themselves, all their known virtue appears
               Productive in Herb, Plant, and nobler birth
               Of Creatures animate with gradual life
               Of Growth, Sense, Reason, al1 summed up in Man.
               With what delight could I have walked thee round,
               If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange
               Of Hill, and Valley, Rivers, Woods and Plains,
               Now Land, now Sea, and Shores with Forest crowned,
               Rocks, Dens, and Caves; but I in none of these
               Find place or refuge; and the more I see
               Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
               Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
               Of contraries; all good to me becomes
               Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state.
               
               But neither here seek I, no nor in Heaven
               To dwell, unless by mastering Heavens Supreme;
               Nor hope to be my self less miserable
               By what I seek, but others to make such
               As I, though thereby worse to me redound:
               For only in destroying I find ease
               To my relentless thoughts; and him destroyed,
               Or won to what may work his utter loss,
               For whom all this was made, all this will soon
               Follow, as to him linked in weal or woe,
               In wo then; that destruction wide may range:
               To me shall be the glory sole among
               The infernal Powers, in one day to have marred
               What he Almighty styled, six Nights and Days
               Continued making, and who knows how long
               Before had bin contriving, though perhaps
               Not longer then since I in one Night freed
               From servitude inglorious well-nigh half
               the Angelic Name, and thinner left the throng
               Of his adorers: he to be avenged,
               And to repair his numbers thus impaired,
               Whether such virtue spent of old now failed
               More Angels to Create, if they at least
               Are his Created, or to spite us more,
               Determined to advance into our room
               A Creature formed of Earth, and him endow,
               Exalted from so base original,
               With Heavenly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed
               He effected; Man he made, and for him built
               Magnificent this World, and Earth his seat,
               Him Lord pronounced, and, O indignity!
               Subjected to his service Angel wings,
               And flaming Ministers to watch and tend
               Their earthy Charge: Of these the vigilance
               
               I dread, and to elude, thus wrapped in mist
               Of midnight vapor glide obscure, and pry
               In every Bush and Brake, where hap may find
               The Serpent sleeping, in whose mazy folds
               To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.
               O foul descent! that I who erst contended
               With Gods to sit the highest, am now constrained
               Into a Beast, and mixed with bestial slime,
               This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
               That to the height of Deity aspired;
               But what will not Ambition and Revenge
               Descend to? who aspires must down as low
               As high he cord, obnoxious first or last
               To basest things.  Revenge, at first though sweet,
               Bitter ere long back on it self recoils;
               Let it; I reck not, so it light well aimed,
               Since higher I fall short, on him who next
               Provokes my envy, this new Favourite
               Of Heaven, this Man of Clay, Son of despite,
               Whom us the more to spite his Maker raised
               From dust: spite then with spite is best repaid.

               
            
            
               Thoughts, whither have ye led me, with what sweet
               Compulsion thus transported to forget
               What hither brought us, hate, not love, nor hope
               Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
               Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy,
               Save what is in destroying, other joy
               To me is lost.  Then let me not let pass
               Occasion which now smiles, behold alone
               The Woman, opportune to all attempts,
               Her Husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
               Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
               And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb
               Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould,
               Foe not informidable, exempt from wound,
               I not; so much hath Hell debased, and pain
               Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven.
               She fair, divinely fair, fit Love for Gods,
               Not terrible, though terror be in Love
               And beauty, not approached by stronger hate,
               Hate stronger, under show of Love well feigned,
               The way which to her ruin now I tend.

               
            
            
               Wonder not, soverign Mistress, if perhaps
               Thou can, who art sole Wonder, much less arm
               Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain,
               Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze
               Insatiate, I thus single, nor have feared
               Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired.
               Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair,
               Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
               By gift, and thy Celestial Beauty adore
               With ravishment beheld, there best beheld
               Where universally admired; but here
               In this enclosure wild, these Beasts among,
               Beholders rude, and shallow to discern
               Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
               Who sees thee? (and what is one?) who should be seen
               A Goddess among Gods, adored and served
               By Angels numberless, thy daily Train.
 Empress of this fair World,
resplendent Eve,
               Easy to me it is to tell thee all
               What thou command, and right thou should be obeyed:
               I was at first as other Beasts that graze
               The trodden Herb, of abject thoughts and low,
               As was my food, nor aught but food discerned
               Or Sex, and apprehended nothing high:
               Till on a day roving the field, I chanced
               A goodly Tree far distant to behold
               Laden with fruit of fairest colours mixed,
               Ruddy and Gold: I nearer drew to gaze;
               When from the boughs a savoury odour blown,
               Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense
               Then smell of sweetest Fenel or the Teats
               Of Ewe or Goat dropping with Milk at Even,
               Unsuckt of Lamb or Kid, that tend their play.
               To satisfy the sharp desire I had
               Of tasting those fair Apples, I resolved
               Not to defer; hunger and thirst at once,
               Powerful perswaders, quickened at the scent
               Of that alluring fruit, urged me so keen.
               About the mossy Trunk I wound me soon,
               For high from ground the branches would require
               Thy utmost reach or Adams: Round the Tree
               All other Beasts that saw, with like desire
               Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.
               Amid the Tree now got, where plenty hung
               Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
               I spared not, for such pleasure till that hour
               At Feed or Fountain never had I found.
               Sated at length, ere long I might perceive
               Strange alteration in me, to degree
               
               Of Reason in my inward Powers, and Speech
               Wanted not long, though to this shape retained.
               Thenceforth to Speculations high or deep
               I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind
               Considered all things visible in Heaven,
               Or Earth, or Middle, all things fair and good;
               But all that fair and good in thy Divine
               Semblance, and in thy Beauties heavenly Ray
               United I beheld; no Fair to thine
               Equivalent or second, which compelled
               Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come
               And gaze, and worship thee of right declared
               Soverign of Creatures, universal Dame.
 Empress, the way is ready, and not
long,
               Beyond a row of Myrtles, on a Flat,
               Fast by a Fountain, one small Thicket past
               Of blowing Myrrh and Balm; if thou accept
               My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon.
 Fickle their State
whom God
               Most Favours, who can please him long; Me first
               He ruined, now Mankind; whom will he next?
               
                  
 Fair Daughter, and thou Son and
Grandchild both,
               High proof ye now have given to be the Race
               Of Satan (for I glory in the name,
               Antagonist of Heavens Almighty King)
                  
               
               Amply have merited of me, of all
               The infernal Empire, that so near Heavens door
               Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
               Mine with this glorious Work, and made one Realm
               Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent
               Of easy thorough-fare.  Therefore while I
               Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease
               To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
               With these successes, and with them rejoice,
               You two this way, among these numerous Orbs
               All yours, right down to Paradise descend;
               There dwell and Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth
               Dominion exercise and in the Air,
               Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declared,
               Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.
               My Substitutes I send ye, and Create
               Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might
               Issuing from me: on your joint vigour now
               My hold of this new Kingdom all depends,
               Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit.
               If your joint power prevails, th'affaires of Hell
               No detriment need fear, go and be strong.

               
            
            
               Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
               For in possession such, not only of right,
               I call ye and declare ye now, returned
               Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
               Triumphant out of this infernal Pit
               Abominable, accursed, the house of woe,
               And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now possess,
               As Lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven
               Little inferior, by my adventure hard
               With peril great achieved.  Long were to tell
               What I have don, what suffered, with what pain
               Voyaged th'unreal, vast, unbounded deep
               Of horrible confusion, over which
               By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved
               To expedite your glorious march; but I
               Toiled out my uncouth passage, forced to ride
               Th'untractable Abyss, plunged in the womb
               Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wilde,
               That jealous of their secrets fiercely opposed
               My journey strange, with clamorous uproar
               Protesting Fate supreme; thence how I found
               The new created World, which fame in Heaven
               Long had foretold, a Fabric wonderful
               Of absolute perfection, therein Man
               Placed in a Paradise, by our exile
               Made happy; Him by fraud I have seduced
               From his Creator, and the more to increase
               Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat
               Offended, worth your laughter, hath given up
               Both his beloved Man and all his World,
               
               To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,
               Without our hazard, labour, or alarm,
               To range in, and to dwell, and over Man
               To rule, as over all he should have ruled.
               True is, me also he hath judged, or rather
               Me not, but the brute Serpent in whose shape
               Man I deceived: that which to me belongs,
               Is enmity, which he will put between
               Me and Mankind; I am to bruise his heel;
               His Seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:
               A World who would not purchase with a bruise,
               Or much more grievous pain ? Ye have th'account
               Of my performance: What remains, ye Gods,
               But up and enter now into full bliss.