
               
            
            
               O Father, what intends thy hand, 

               
               Against thy only Son? What fury O Son,
               Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart
               Against thy Fathers head? and know for whom;
               For him who sits above and laughs the while
               At thee ordained his drudge, to execute
               What ever his wrath, which he calls justice, bids,
               His wrath which one day will destroy ye both.

               
               has thou forgot me then, and do I seem
               Now in thine eyes so foul, once deemed so fair
               In Heaven, when at The Assembly, and in sight
               Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
               In bold conspiracy against Heavens King,
               All on a sudden miserable pain
               Surprised thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzy swum
               In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
               Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
               Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
               Then shining heavenly fair, a Goddess armed
               Out of thy head I sprung: amazement seized
               All the Host of Heaven; back they recoiled afraid
               At first, and called me Sin, and for a Sign
               Portentous held me; but familiar grown,
               I pleased, and with attractive graces won
               The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft
               Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing
               Became enamoured, and such joy thou took
               With me in secret, that my womb conceived
               A growing burden.  Mean while War arose,
               And fields were fought in Heaven; wherein remained
               (For what could else) to our Almighty Foe
               Clear Victory, to our part loss and rout
               Through all the Empyrean: down they fell
               Driven headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down
               Into this Deep, and in the general fall
               I also; at which time this powerful Key
               Into my hand was given, with charge to keep
               These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass
               Without my opening.  Pensive here I sat
               Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb 
                  
               
               Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown
               Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
               At last this odious offspring whom thou see
               Thine own begotten, breaking violent way
               Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain
               Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
               Transformed: but he my inbred enemy
               Forth issued, brandishing his fatal Dart
               Made to destroy: I fled, and cried out Death;
               Hell trembled at the hideous Name, and sighed
               From all her Caves, and back resounded Death.
               I fled, but he pursued (though more, it seems,
               Inflamed with lust then rage) and swifter far,
               Me overtook his mother all dismayed,
               And in embraces forcible and foul
               Engendering with me, of that rape begot
               These yelling Monsters that with ceaseless cry
               Surround me, as thou saw, hourly conceived
               And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
               To me, for when they list into the womb
               That bred them they return, and howl and gnaw
               My Bowels, their repast; then bursting forth
               A fresh with conscious terrors vex me round,
               That rest or intermission none I find.
               Before mine eyes in opposition sits
               Grim Death my Son and foe, who sets them on,
               And me his Parent would full soon devour
               For want of other prey, but that he knows
               His end with mine involved; and knows that I
               Should prove a bitter Morsel, and his bane,
               When ever that shall be; so Fate pronounced.
               But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, shun
               His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope
               To be invulnerable in those bright Arms,
               
               Though tempered heavenly, for that mortal dint,
               Save he who reigns above, none can resist.

               
            
            
               The key of this infernal Pit by due,
               And by command of Heavens all-powerful King
               I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
               These Adamantine Gates; against all force
               Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
               Fearless to be overmatched by living might.
               But what ow I to his commands above
               Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
               Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
               To sit in hateful Office here confined,
               Inhabitant of Heaven, and heavenly-born,
               Here in perpetual agony and pain,
               With terrors and with clamours compassed round
               Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed:
               Thou art my Father, thou my Author, thou
               My being gave me; whom should I obey
               But thee, whom follow? thou wilt bring me soon
               To that new world of light and bliss, among
               The Gods who live at ease, where I shall Reign
               At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
               Thy daughter and thy darling, without end.

               
            
            
               O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
               Idly, while Satan our great Author thrives
               In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides
               For us his offspring dear; It cannot be
               But that success attends him; if mishap,
               Ere this he had returned, with fury driven
               By his Avenger, since no place like this
               Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
               Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
               Wings growing, and Dominion given me large
               Beyond this Deep; whatever draws me on,
               Or sympathy, or some connatural force
               Powerful at greatest distance to unite
               With secret amity things of like kind
               By secretest conveyance.  Thou my Shade
               Inseparable must with me along:
               For Death from Sin no power can separate.
               But least the difficulty of passing back
                  
               
               Stay his return perhaps over this Gulf
               Impassable, Impervious, let us try
               Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine
               Not unagreeable, to found a path
               Over this Maine from Hell to that new World
               Where Satan now prevails, a Monument
               Of merit high to all the infernal Host,
               Easing their passage hence, for intercourse,
               Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead.
               Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
               By this new felt attraction and instinct.

               
            
            
               O Parent, these are thy magnificant deeds,  
               
               Thy Trophies, which thou view as not thine own,
               Thou art their Author and prime Architect:
               For I no sooner in my Heart divined,
               My Heart, which by a secret harmony
               Still moves with thine, joined in connexion sweet,
               That thou on Earth had prospered, which thy looks
               Now also evidence, but straight I felt
               Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt
               That I must after thee with this thy Son;
               Such fatal consequence unites us three:
               Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds,
               Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure
               Detain from following thy illustrious track.
               Thou has achieved our liberty, confined
               Within Hell Gates till, now, thou us impow'rd
               To fortify thus far, and overlay
               With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyss.
               Thine now is all this World, thy virtue hath won
               What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gained
               With odds what War hath lost, and fully avenged
               Our foil in Heaven; here thou shalt Monarch reign,
               There did not; there let him still Victor sway,
               As Battle hath adjudged, from this new World
               Retiring, by his own doom alienated,
               And henceforth Monarchy with thee divide
               Of all things parted by the Empyreal bounds,
               His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World,
               Or try thee now more dangerous to his Throne.

               
            
            
               Second of Satan sprung, all conquering Death,
               
               What think thou of our Empire now, though earned
               With travail difficult, not better far
               Then still at Hells dark threshold to have sate watch,
               Unnamed, untreated, and thy self half starved?

 Thou therefore on these Herbs, and
Fruits, and Flours
               Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Foul,
               No homely morsels, and whatever thing
               The Sith of Time mowes down, devour unspar'd,
               Till I in Man residing through the Race,
               His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect,
               And season him thy last and sweetest prey.