
               
            
            
               O Father, gracious was that word which closed
               Thy soverign sentence, that Man should find grace;
               For which both Heaven and Earth shall high extol
               Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
               Of Hymns and sacred Songs, where to thy Throne
               Encompassed shall resound thee ever blessed.
               For should Man finally be lost, should Man 
               
               Thy creature late so loved, thy youngest Son
               Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joined
               With his own folly? that be from thee far,
               That far be from thee, Father, who art Judge
               Of all things made, and judge only right.
               Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
               His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfil
               His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought,
               Or proud return though to his heavier doom,
               Yet with revenge accomplished and to Hell
               Draw after him the whole Race of mankind,
               By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy self
               Abolish thy Creation, and unmake,
               For him, what for thy glory thou has made?
               So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
               Be questioned and blasphemed without defence.

               
            
            
               Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace;
               And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
               The speediest of thy winged messengers,
               To visit all thy creatures, and to all
               Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought,
               Happy for man, so coming; he her aide
               Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost;
               Atonement for himself or offering meet,
               Indebted and undone, hath none to bring:
               Behold me then, me for him, life for life
               I offer, on me let thine anger fall;
               Account me man; I for his sake will leave
               Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee
               Freely put off, and for him lastly dye
               Well pleased, on me let Death wreck all his rage;
               Under his gloomy power I shall not long
               Lie vanquished; thou has given me to possess
               Life in my self for ever, by thee I live,
               Though now to Death I yield, and am his due
               All that of me can die, yet that debt paid,
               Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave
               His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soul
               For ever with corruption there to dwell;
               But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue
               My vanquisher, spoiled of his vented spoil;
               Death his deaths wound shall then receive, and stoop
               Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed. 
                  
               
               I through the ample Air in Triumph high
               Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and show
               The powers of darkness bound.  Thou at the sight
               Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
               While by thee raised I ruin all my Foes,
               Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave:
               Then with the multitude of my redeemed
               Shall enter Heaven long absent, and return,
               Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
               Of anger shall remain, but peace assured,
               And reconciling; wrath shall be no more
               Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire.
 Mighty Father, thou
thy foes
               Justly has in derision, and secure
               Laugh at their vain designs and tumults vain,
               Matter to me of Glory, whom their hate
               Illustrates, when they see all Regal Power
               Given me to quell their pride, and in event 
               
               Know whether I be dextrose to subdue
               Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven.

               
            
            
               O Father, O Supreme of heavenly Thrones,
               First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou always seeks
               To glorify thy Son, I always thee,
               As is most just; this I my Glory account,
               My exaltation, and my whole delight,
               That thou in me well pleased, declare thy will
               Fulfilled, which to fulfil is all my bliss.
               Sceptre and Power, thy giving, I assume,
               And gladlier shall resign, when in the end
               Thou shalt be All in All, and I in thee
               For ever, and in me all whom thou love:
               But whom thou hates, I hate, and can put on
               Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on,
               Image of thee in all things; and shall soon,
               Armed with thy might, rid heaven of these rebelled,
               To their prepared ill Mansion driven down
               To chains of darkness, and the undying Worm,
               That from thy just obedience could revolt,
               Whom to obey is happiness entire.
               Then shall thy Saints unmixed, and from th'impure
               Far separate, circling thy holy Mount
               Unfeigned Halleluiahs to thee sing,
               Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief.
               So said, he o'er his Sceptre bowing, rose
               From the right hand of Glory where he sate,
               
               And the third sacred Morn began to shine
               Dawning through Heaven: forth rushed with whirlwind sound
               The Chariot of Paternal Deity,                   
               Flashing thick flames, Wheel within Wheel undrawn,
               It self instinct with Spirit, but convoyed
               By four Cherubic shapes, four Faces each
               Had wondrous, as with Stars their bodies all
               And Wings were set with Eyes, with Eyes the wheels
               Of Beril, and careering Fires between;
               Over their heads a crystal Firmament,
               Whereon a Sapphire Throne, inlaid with pure
               Amber, and colours of the shower Arch.
               He in Celestial Panoply all armed
               Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought,
               Ascended, at his right hand Victory
               Sate Eagle-winged, beside him hung his Bow
               And Quiver with three-bolted Thunder stored,
               And from about him fierce Effusion rolled
               Of smoke and bickering flame, and sparkles dire;
               Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints,
               He onward came, far off his coming shone,
               And twenty thousand (I their number heard)
               Chariots of God, half on each hand were seen:
               He on the wings of Cherub rode sublime
               On the Crystalline Sky, in Sapphire Throned.
               Illustrious far and wide, but by his own
               First seen, them unexpected joy surprised,
               When the great Ensign of Messiah blazed
               Aloft by Angels born, his Sign in Heaven:
               Under whose conduct Michael soon reduced
               His Army, circumfus'd on either Wing,
               Under their Head embodied all in one.
               Before him Power Divine his way prepared;
               At his command the uprooted Hills retired
               
               Each to his place, they heard his voice and went
               Obsequious, Heaven his wonted face renewed,
               And with fresh Flowerets Hill and Valley smiled.
               This saw his hapless Foes but stood obdur'd,
               And to rebellious fight rallied their Powers
               Insensate, hope conceiving from despair.
               In heavenly Spirits could such perverseness dwell?
               But to convince the proud what Signs avail,
               Or Wonders move th'obdurate to relent?
               They hardened more by what might most reclaim,
               Grieving to see his Glory, at the sight
               Took envy, and aspiring to his height,
               Stood reimbattell'd fierce, by force or fraud
               Weaning to prosper, and at length prevail
               Against God and Messiah, or to fall
               In universal ruin last, and now
               To final Battle drew, disdaining flight,
               Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God
               To all his Host on either hand thus spake.

               
            
            
               Stand still in bright array ye Saints, here  stand
               Ye Angels armed, this day from Battle rest;
               Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God
               Accepted, fearless in his righteous Cause,
               And as ye have received, so have ye don
               Invincibly; but of this cursed crew
               The punishment to other hand belongs,
               Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints;
               Number to this days work is not ordained
               Nor multitude, stand only and behold
               Gods indignation on these Godless poured
               By me, not you but me they have despised,
               Yet envied; against me is all their rage,
               Because the Father, They whom in Heaven supreme
               Kingdom and Power and Glory appertains,
               
               Hath honoured me according to his will.
               Therefore to me their doom he hath assigned;
               That they may have their wish, to try with me
               In Battle which the stronger proves, they all,
               Or I alone against them, since by strength
               They measure all, of other excellence
               Not emulous, nor care who them excels;
               Nor other strife with them do I voutchsafe.

               
            
            
               Silence, ye troubled waves, and thou Deep, peace,
               
                  

 your  discord end:
               
                  
 thus far extend, thus
far thy bounds,
               This be thy just Circumference, O World.
               
                  

               
            
            
               Let there be Light, 
 let there be
Firmament
               Amid the Waters, and let it divide
               The Waters from the Waters: 
 Be gathered now ye Waters under
Heaven
               Into one place, and let dry Land appear.
               
                  

 Let the Earth
               Put forth the verdant Grass, Herb yielding Seed,
               And Fruit Tree yielding Fruit after her kind;
               Whose Seed is in her self upon the Earth.
               
                  

Let there be Lights
               High in the expanse of Heaven to divide
               The Day from Night; and let them be for Signs,
               For Seasons, and for Days, and circling Years,
               And let them be for Lights as I ordain
               Their Office in the Firmament of Heaven
               To give Light on the Earth; 
 let the Waters
generate
               Reptile with Spawn abundant, living Soul:
               And let Foul fly above the Earth, with wings
               Displayed on the open Firmament of Heaven.
               
                  
 Be fruitful, multiply, and in the
Seas
               And Lakes and running Streams the waters fill;
               And let the Foul be multiplied on the Earth.
               
                  
 Let the Earth bring forth Foul
living in her kind,
               Cattle and Creeping things, and Beast of the Earth,
               Each in their kind.  
 Be fruitful, multiply, and fill
the Earth,
               Subdue it, and throughout Dominion hold
               Over Fish of the Sea, and Foul of the Air,
               And every living thing that moves on the Earth.
               
                  

               
            
            
               Father Eternal, thine is to decree,
               Mine both in Heaven and Earth to do thy will
               Supreme, that thou in me thy Son beloved
               May ever rest well pleased.  I go to judge
               On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou know,
               Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
               When time shall be, for so I undertook
               Before thee; and not repenting, this obtain
               Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
               On me derived, yet I shall temper so
               Justice with Mercy, as may illustrate most
               Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
               Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none
               Are to behold the Judgment, but the judged,
               
               Those two; the third best absent is condemned,
               Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law
               Conviction to the Serpent none belongs.

               
            
            
               Where art thou Adam, wont with joy to meet
               My coming seen far off? I miss thee here,
               Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude,
               Where obvious duty meanwhile appeared unsought:
               Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
               Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth.
               
                  

               
            
            
               My voice thou oft has heard, and has not feared,
               But still rejoiced, how is it now become
               So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who
               Hath told thee? has thou eaten of the Tree
               Whereof I gave thee charge thou should not eat?
 Was she thy God, that her thou
did obey
               Before his voice, or was she made thy guide,
               Superior, or but equal, that to her
               Thou did resign thy Manhood, and the Place
               Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
               And for thee, whose perfection far excelled
               
               Hers in all real dignity: Adorned
               She was indeed, and lovely to attract
               Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts
               Were such as under Government well seemed,
               Unseemly to bear rule, which was thy part
               And person, had thou known thy self aright.
 Say Woman, what is this which
thou has done?

               
            
            
               Because thou has done this, thou art accursed
               Above all Cattle, each Beast of the Field;
               Upon thy Belly grovelling thou shalt go,
               And dust shalt eat all the days of thy Life.
               Between Thee and the Woman I will put
               Enmity, and between thine and her Seed;
               Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.

               
            
            
               Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
               By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring
               In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will
               Thine shall submit, he over thee shall rule.
 Because thou has hearkened to the
voice of thy  Wife,
               And eaten of the Tree concerning which
               I charged thee, saying: Thou shalt not eat thereof,
               Cursed is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow
               Shalt eat thereof all the days of thy Life;
               Thorns also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth
               Unbid, and thou shalt eat th'Herb of th'Field,
               In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eat Bread,
               Till thou return unto the ground, for thou
               Out of the ground was taken, know thy Birth,
               For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.

               
            
            
               See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung
               From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs
               And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixed
               With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring,
               Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed
               Sow'n with contrition in his heart, then those
               Which his own hand manuring all the Trees
               Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen
               From innocence.  Now therefore bend thine ear
               To supplication, hear his sighs though mute;
               Unskilful with what words to pray, let me
               Interpret for him, me his Advocate
               And propitiation, all his works on me
               Good or not good engraft, my Merit those
               Shall perfect, and for these my Death shall pay.
               Accept me, and in me from these receive
               The smell of peace toward Mankind, let him live
               Before thee reconciled, at least his days
               
               Numbered, though sad, till Death, his doom (which I
               To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse)
               To better life shall yield him, where with me
               All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss,
               Made one with me as I with thee am one.

               
            
            
               O Sons, like one of us Man is become
               To know both Good and Evil, since his taste
               Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast
               His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got,
               Happier, had it sufficed him to have known
               Good by it self, and Evil not at all.
               He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
               My motions in him, longer then they move,
               His heart I know, how variable and vain
               Self-left.  Least therefore his now bolder hand
               Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat,
               And live for ever, dream at least to live
               For ever, to remove him I decree,
               And send him from the Garden forth to Till
               The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soil.
            
            
               
                  Michael, this my behest have thou in charge,
               Take to thee from among the Cherubim
               Thy choice of flaming Warriors, least the Fiend
               Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
               Vacant possession some new trouble raise:.
               has thee, and from the Paradise of God
               Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair,
               From hallowed ground th'unholie, and denounce
               To them and to their Progeny from thence
                  
               
               Perpetual banishment.  Yet least they faint
               At the sad Sentence rigorously urged,
               For I behold them softened and with tears
               Bewailing their excess, all terror hide.
               If patiently thy bidding they obey,
               Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveal
               To Adam what shall come in future days,
               As I shall thee enlighten, intermix
               My Covenant in the women's seed renewed;
               So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:
               And on the East side of the Garden place,
               Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs,
               Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame
               Wide waving, all approach far off to fright,
               And guard all passage to the Tree of Life:
               Least Paradise a receptacle prove
               To Spirits foul, and all my Trees their prey,
               With whose stolen Fruit Man once more to delude.